International Journal of Fracture, Vol. 9, No. 2, June 1973                                                          199
Noordhoff International Publishing- Leiden
Printed in The Netherlands



Crack propagation under creep conditions in a quenched                                                 chromium
I molybdenum steel
M. J. S I V E R N S A N D A. T. P R I C E
Central Electricity Generatin9 Board (Midlands), Scientific Services Dept:, Nottingham, England
(Received December 14, 1971)




SUMMARY
Crack growth rates have been measured in single edge-notched specimens of 2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel loaded in tension at
565 °C. It is shown that the creep crack growth rate in tests of up to about 2,000 hours duration can be described
in terms of the sharp crack stress intensity factor. A correlation is obtained over five orders of magnitude in crack
growth rate and the relationship of these results to conventional creep tests is discussed. For the particular test con-
ditions the time required to initiate a crack from a notch is not significant compared with the total times for specimens
to fail. Under some conditions high rates of stable crack growth rate can be obtained. The work has obvious potential
in the assessment of the integrity of components which contain defects and operate under creep conditions. A possible
application of the data to the analysis of a particular thermal fatigue situation is suggested.



1. Introduction

Many technological problems arise in the manufacture of large pressure vessels and pipework
used by the C.E.G.B. in the steam circuit of power generating plant. Much of the plant operates
at about 565 °C and is fabricated from low alloy creep resisting ferritic steels usually joined with
2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel weld metal. These components can contain cracks or crack-like defects result-
ing from fabrication, particularly by welding. The current codes of practice, British Standard
1113, 1966 and ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, 1969, contain inspection procedures
intended to ensure good weld quality and do not l~ermit detectable crack-like defects. These
criteria are undoubtedly too conservative in many situations and there are strong economic
incentives to operate plant containing defects at least for limited periods. However, there is
virtually no information that can be used to assess quantitatively the life of components con-
taining defects and there is an urgent need for information on the growth of defects under creep
conditions so that possible amendments to the existing codes can be proposed.
   Hitherto, creep studies have been concerned with the mechanisms and conditions leading to
the onset of tertiary creep resulting from the formation and linkage of wedge-shaped cracks or
cavities on grain boundaries. Many theories have been advanced to explain the general de-
terioration of creep strength in terms of specific mechanisms and these are well documented
[1, 2, 3]. However, direct studies of crack growth under conditions leading to quantitative
descriptions of creep behaviour are relatively few [-4, 5] and the present work was undertaken
to measure crack growth rates in an attempt to investigate the application of fracture me-
chanics where creep conditions exist. Some observations on this work have been made [6] ;
the present paper and comments are concerned with analysis of the data and its interpretation
in terms of the mechanics of crack growth.

2. Materials

Two pieces of 2¼Cr 1 Mo steel pipe about 300 mm o.d. and 50 mm wall thickness were obtained
from a piping contractor; compositions are given in Table 1 and some mechanical properties
at room temperature and 565°C in Table 2. Radial slices approximately 8 mm thick and 250
mm long were taken heat treated at 1350°C for five minutes and oil quenched to simulate a

                                                                                Int. Journ. of Fracture, 9 (1973) 199-207
20O                                                                                      M. J. Siverns, A. T. Price

TABLE 1
Chemical Composition

              C          Mn       Si        S         P           Cr     Ni       Mo         Cu            V

Pipe 1        0.13       0,46     0.52      0,009     0.013       2.30   0.13     0.92       0.15          0.10
Pipe 2        0.13       0,49     0.53      0,010     0.011       2.35   *        0.95       *             *

* Not analysed.


TABLE 2
Mechanical Properties

Temperature          Heat                                 Strain         Limit of                   Ultimate tensile
°C                   treatment                            rate min- t    proportionality            strength M N . m - 2
                                                                         M N . m -2

 20                  Solution treated at 1350°C for       10 -2          819                        1231
                     5 min and oil quenched
565                  Solution treated at 1350°C for       10 -4          460                         618
                     5 min and oil quenched
565                  Solution treated at 1350°C for       10 -3          600                         770
                     5 rain and oil quenched
 20                  As above and tempered at             10 -4          464                         645
                     690°C for 1 hr
565                  As above and tempered at             10-4           280                         370
                     690°C for 1 hr
565                  As above and tempered at             10- 3          600                        --
                     690°C for 1 hr



material condition comparable to that existing in the heat-affected zone of a weld. The resulting
average grain diameter was 0.6 mm as measured by the linear intercept method.
   2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel was chosen for this investigation because it is used in the wrought form for
pipes, and as weld metal for joining other low alloy ferritic steels such as ½ Cr ½ Mo ¼ V in
C.E.G.B. plant operating at about 565 °C. Previous work [7, 8] on the short term mechanical
properties of this material has shown that it can have low ductility and in this condition it is
susceptible to cracking. The use of 2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel in a low ductility form was also attractive
experimentally because the electrical potential method of crack length measurement used in
this work would be relatively unaffected by specimen deformation. For similar reasons, it might
be expected that linear elastic fracture mechanics could be used to describe crack growth rate
in this material.

3. Experimental

The need to monitor the extension of pre-existing cracks has stimulated interest in techniques
for measuring crack growth and in particular the measurement of crack length using potential
drop across a crack has received detailed attention [9]. This technique has been used hereto
monitor crack growth. The method consists of passing a direct current through a notched or
cracked specimen and measuring the electrical potential across the notch or crack ; this can
then be related to the crack length using curves computed by Gilbey and Pearson or by direct
calibration.
  Test pieces were machined from the heat treated blanks to the form and dimensions shown
in Fig. 1. In addition, some specimens were machined to a width, W, of 15 ram. Tests were
carried out with various constant loads at 565 °C in air using lever-loaded creep machines.

Int. Journ. of Fracture, 9 (1973} 199-207
Crack propagation under creep conditions in a quenched 2¼ Cr 1 M o steel                                 201


   _I                                     i
 B 5 o~..I   ',   I                        )         [   I   I   I
                                     200 u~(no m ~               ,




Figure 1. Form and dimensionsof a typicaltest-piece.

Pin-load specimens were electrically isolated from the machine frames. A direct current of
about 15 A was used and the electrical potential across the notch was monitored continuously
using a millivolt recorder. Some tests were interrupted and specimens sectioned to determine
the true crack length. During the work it was decided to conduct some tests at constant stress
intensity factor and this was achieved by reducing the applied load as the crack grew. In two
tests, cracked specimens were unloaded and heat treated at 700°C for three hours in air to
simulate the effect of a post weld stress relief; the specimens were then reloaded and the tests
continued.

4. Results

Fracture occurred by an intergranular mode along prior austenite grain boundaries. In the
most highly stressed test piece small areas were observed which could have been transgranular
failure of original austenite grains or intergranular failure between bainite platelets. On a
macroscopic scale the crack grew from the notch in a direction at right angles to the applied
stress and specimens finally fractured by shear. Comparisons between cracks measured
optically and by the electrical potential technique showed that the true position of the crack
front was determined to within about _+0.06 mm. However, in the present tests, when the crack
initiated from the notch, the electrical potential across the crack was affected by the local
orientation of the crack plane until the crack had grown away from the probe positions. For
this reason the results refer to cracks which extend more than 0.12 mm beyond the notch tip.
Inspection of the test records indicated that the crack initiation period was small.
  A typical crack growth curve is presented in Fig. 2 and, without implying a particular



    $.O



    7.O



    6.o



!,c
    4C



    a'C
                      J
                          TIME, P¢
Figure 2. Typicalcrack growthcurve.

                                                                     Int. Journ. of Fracture, 9 (1973) 199-207
202                                                                                  M. J. Sioerns, A. T. Price

mode of crack growth, it is clear that such curves can be smoothed. The crack growth rates were
determined by taking tangents at suitable crack lengths. Results from a typical test are shown
in F.kg.3 where crack growth rate is presented as a function of the opening mode stress intensity
facto~ K, calculated assuming the sharp crack formula [10] :
                    K = a a~f(a/W)
where tr is the applied gross stress, a is the total length of notch plus crack and W is the specimen
width.
        t42



        ~63




                     /
7
    I
        164

    !


         166
                        I     I    I     I   [   I    I   I   I
               IO      tS    20    30   40 50                 I00
                    STRESS INTENSITY FACTOR kin 11-3/2
Figure 3. Relationship between crack growth rate and stress intensity factor, from Fig. 2.




T~ ~63


!


        16s




        166

              ,o      ,'s   ,'o   ao    ,~o so ....           ,oo
                    STRESS INTENSITY FACI~R MNm-312
Figure 4. Crack growth rate versus stress intensity factor, mean line data.

   The results from several tests are given in Fig. 4 where only the mean lines have been plotted.
For comparison crack growth rate is plotted as a function of net section stress in Fig. 5. The
dotted lines in Figs. 4 and 5 relate to the crack growth rates found in the two tests in which the
stress intensity factor was kept constant. It is considered that the crack growth rates in these
tests were essentially constant within the limits of experimental accuracy. Curves relating initial
stress intensity factor and gross section stress to failure time are presented in Fig. 6.

Int. Journ. o f Fracture, 9 (1973) 199-207
Crack propa#ation under creep conditions in a quenched 2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel                                                                                  203

      ,6 j




             TESTS AT CONSTANT
             STRESS INTENSITY




      163



i la4




      ~661
             IOO         150 2OO        3OO    4OO    600

                   NET SECTION STRESSMNm'2
Figure 5. Crack growth rate versus net section stress, mean line data.
                                                                                          SOO
                    50
                             ~                         O GROSS SECTIONSTRESS              4O0
                    40
                                    ~N                 • INITIAL STR~'~ INTENSITY          3O:)
INITIALSTRESS 3 0                                        FACTOR                                   GROSSSECTION
INTENSITY                                                                                         S T R ~ MNm'2
FACTOR                                                                                     200

MNm
                    IS
                             ~   L~E
                                                              FOR GROSSSECTIONSTRES
                                                                                           150


                                 LINE FOR INITIAL             ~
                    ro




                                                                                           50




                                                                                          30


                                    i          ~        i         ,      ,           i
                          iO-I      iO O       IO I     IO2       IO 3   fO4      IOs    IO 6
                                               TIME TO FAILURE,HOURS
Figure 6. Initial stress intensity factor and gross section stress versus time to failure.

  The two test pieces which were unloaded, heat treated at 700 °C and retested both failed
rapidly by shear deformation.
  Table 3 shows hardness values for specimens after failure and values are included for the
original material before and after tempering at 700 °C for three hours.
TABLE 3
Typical Hardness Results

Condition                               Total time at                          Test duration,            VPN3o
                                        565 °C, hours                          hours

Quenched                                   0                                     0                       385--415
Quenched and                               0                                     0                       200
tempered
Creep tested                              1.7                                    1.4                     382
                                         24                                      0.23                    274
                                         28                                     24.4                     330
                                         84                                     50                       272
                                        120                                    120                       238


                                                                                                                    Int. Journ. o f Fracture, 9 (1973) 199-207
 204                                                                         M. d. Siverns, A. T. Price

5. Discussion

5.1. Crack Growth Behaviour

The results for typical tests can be described adequately by straight lines on log-log plots of
crack growth rate against stress intensity or net section stress. It is evident from Figs. 4 and 5
that better correlation is achieved using stress intensity factor. In terms of net section stress the
results for all tests appear as a family of approximately parallel lines whereas lines relating
crack growth rate to stress intensity factor can be contained within a scatter band of about one
order of magnitude in crack growth rate. The tests carried out on specimens at constant stress
intensity factor support this interpretation although not excluding other relationships.
   The correlation with stress intensity factor extends over about five orders of magnitude in
crack growth rate and a reasonable description of the results is given by the equation:
       da/dt = AK"                                                                                   (1)
where da/dt is the crack growth rate and K is the sharp crack stress intensity factor. When
da/dt is in m/hr and K in M N . m -~ linear regression analysis gives A as 8.1 × 10-12 and n as
5.2. The differences in slopes in individual tests are probably within the limits of the experimen-
tal techniques. The extent of the correlation is somewhat surprising since Table 3 shows that
the material has undoubtedly been tempered by exposure at 555 °C so that the mechanical
properties of the material would have altered during testing. In particular in the short term tests
the material properties would be similar to those for quenched material, whereas in the long
term tests they would be nearer to those of fully tempered material, see Table 2. It therefore
appears that the metallurgical condition of the material does not markedly influence the crack
growth rate in these tests. This conclusion might seem to conflict with the view that creep strength
is dependent upon metallurgical structure. However, collected data [l l] indicate that at a
particular stress an order of magnitude in time to rupture includes all results for 2¼ Cr 1 Mo
steel formed and heat treated in various ways. Indeed, in conventional creep tests, cracks
comparable with those in the present tests are found only during the tertiary stage. It is this
stage which is relevant here but little information exists in the literature because tertiary creep
data are not used in design.
   The correlation between stress intensity factor and crack growth rate should be regarded
as empirical at present. However, the high value of 5.2 obtained for the index, n, in equation 1
suggests a similarity with conventional creep testing where creep strain rate 4, is related to the
applied stress, a, by the well known equation:
         = B o~                                                                                      (2)
where B and m are constant. This is clearly a subject for further investigation and tests involving
a wider range of crack and specimen geometries and other systems of stress application are
required to define the limits of applicability.
    Strictly interpreted, the stress intensity factor defines the stress-strain distribution close to
the crack tip in an elastic body. A creep situation is difficult to interpret in these terms. On initial
loading, a notional plastic zone of linear dimensions proportional to (K/ar) 2 will be formed
[12], where ar can be taken as the flow stress at an appropriate loading rate. In the test conduct-
ed here and usually in creep tests, the stresses applied are low compared with time-independent
flow stresses, so that the plastic zone size corrections would be small. Creep relaxation will
occur at the crack tip in a manner dependent upon the original stress gradient while maintain-
ing compatibility with elastic and creep strains away from the crack. The high stress dependence
of creep strain and the distribution of stress will ensure that the concentration of deformation
in the vicinity of the crack tip is at least an order of magnitude greater than that in the matrix.
In this case it is possible that displacements in the matrix of the material will contribute relatively
little to the fracture process. Generally such a criterion would not be valid in a creep situation
although the total matrix deformation prior to the onset of tertiary creep in medium term tests

Int. Journ. of Fracture, 9 (1973} 199-207
Crack propagation under creep conditions in a quenched 2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel                             205

would not exceed about 5 ~ in the type of steel used here. The objection to the use of linear
elastic fracture mechanics, here, is that general deformation destroys the elastic stress/strain
distribution near the crack tip. This objection is overcome if a mechanism exists whereby a
sharp crack situation is continuously regenerated. In the present case cracking is intergranular
and following each small increment of crack growth successive positions of the crack front can
be considered as sharp crack situations. The instantaneous stress distribution following each
increment of crack growth will be defined by the particular value of K. Any prior deformation
will affect K only through alterations in the macroscopic stress field and these effects will be
minimal. Thus for any particular position of the crack front creep relaxation will occur initially
from the linear elastic stress distribution so that creep damage ahead of the crack may be ex-
pected to have functional dependence upon K.
   A less progressive approach would be to suppose that a function involving a, a and a/W
embodies those parameters that control crack extension so that with the normal scatter of data
a log-log plot would achieve correlation ; indeed in studies of fatigue crack growth it has been
shown that when data is obtained over limited ranges, quite different relationships between
crack growth rate, a and a can describe results [13, 14, 15].

5.2. Crack Initiation and Final Failure

The test records of electrical potential drop across the notch were not reliable until the crack
had grown to about 0.12 mm so that there is uncertainty concerning crack initiation periods.
In this work the sensitivity of the method for determining crack length has been continuously
improved. The most recent results indicate that the time for crack initiation from a notch is
small compared with the time to failure. During initial crack growth over about 0.12 mm from
the notch tip it appears that a decreasing rate of crack growth is obtained; when equilibrium
conditions are achieved the crack growth rate can be described as in equation 1. Mechanistically
therefore it appears that crack initiation occurs soon after loading, although phenomenologi-
cally a decreasing rate of crack growth rate is equivalent to a period required for crack initia-
tion. This is being investigated in more detail.
   Stable crack growth by an essentially intergranular mode continued until the remaining
cross sectional area was unable to sustain the applied load. The final failure event was by shear
deformation to the sides and/or back faces of specimens. Shear failures of the heat treated and
retested specimens illustrate the influence of time-independent flow stress on the failure event.
From the results a minimum value of plane strain fracture toughness, Ktc, can be estimated,
assuming the criterion [10] that plane strain conditions exist when the test piece thickness is
greater than 2.5 (K/try)2.
   From Table 2, taking a v the yield stress, as between 300 MN. m - 2, and 600 MN. m - 2 values
of about 13 MN. m- ~ and 26 MN. m- ~ are obtained.Averaging these it can be inferred that the
plane strain fracture toughness of the material at 565 °C exceeds about 20 MN. m-~. However,
this value should only be used as a guide since where time dependent plastic relaxation can
occur the criterion for plane strain may not apply. In practice, a knowledge of Klc may not be
as useful for the assessment of creep situations as it is in lower temperature applications, be-
cause high rates of stable creep crack growth can be achieved ; it may be more appropriate to
choose a stress intensity at which some particular crack growth rate is reached.

5.3. Some Implications and Applications

The present data relate to crack growth rates from defects causing failure in up to about 2 × 103
hours, while components for elevated temperature application in the power generating in-
dustry have a design life requirement of l0 s hours. It is therefore important to extend the work
to determine the range over which the correlation between crack growth rate and stress
intensity holds. In general terms, crack growth rates of the order of 10-s-10- ~ m/hr corre-
spond to creep failure in about 10- 5 hours. Thus if there is a stress intensity below which crack

                                                                Int. Journ. of Fracture, 9 (1973) 199-207
206                                                                         M. J. Siverns, A. T. Price

growth does not occur for 2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel, its value would not be greater than about 2 M N .
m - ~ based on linear extrapolation of the data in Fig. 4. Therefore finite crack growth rates are
likely to exist at low stress intensity factors so that extrapolation of the data can be used to
estimate the rate of growth of defects in Components. It may be noted that where estimates are
based on crack growth data the uncertainty regarding the period of crack initiation would
cause the life to be underestimated by a factor not greater than two.
   From Fig. 6 it can be seen that the time to failure is related to the initial stress intensity factor.
This arises because the life can be estimated from the crack propagation data by integrating
equation 1 with appropriate values for the constants. When n is large most of the life is spent
propagating the crack a small distance from the notch as can be seen from Fig. 2. Therefore
when crack initiation is negligible time to failure will be related to initial stress intensity
factor. Using linear regression analysis the equation relating time to failure, ty, and initial
stress intensity factor, K, in fig. 6 is:
        tf =   1.9 x 10s K - s.4                                                                      (3)
where tf is in hours and K is in MN. m -~. The correlation between gross section stress and time
to failure in Fig. 6 is not unexpected because the variation of initial geometries was small. It is
anticipated that the curve would be displaced with major increases in notch depth.
   The results of the crack growth studies could have application to the behaviour of materials
when subjected to thermal stress. This is of great practical interest, particularly in the power
generating and gas turbine industries. One form of loading regime is a reversed strain cycle with
the load maintained at or near its maximum tensile value for several hours at elevated tempera-
tures [16, 17]. Here fatigue and creep mechanisms both contribute to crack growth and crack
initiation can be relatively easy. It is instructive to compare the present results with those ob-
tained in studies of fatigue. Crooker and Lange [-18] have collated data on fatigue crack
growth rates in steels as described by the stress intensity factor. Graphs similar to Fig. 4 are
obtained and for low strength, plain carbon and low alloy steels a narrow scatter band covers
the data. The values of the exponent vary between 2 and 4 and typical values of crack growth
rate a r e 10 - 7 and 10 -s m/cycle at about 33 M N . m -~ and 66 M N . m -~ respectively. For
the creep situation the exponent is about 5 and the corresponding growth rates are about
2 x 10 -4 m/hr and 3 x 10 -2 m/hr; furthermore significant creep crack growth occurs at low
stress intensity factors where fatigue crack growth is negligible. It is clear that in such a thermal
fatigue situation the contribution of creep extension to the crack growth rate will be several
orders of magnitude greater than that of fatigue if the two processes can be considered to
act independently. Admittedly, the fatigue data were obtained from room temperature tests,
but since the increment of fatigue crack growth per cycle is related to the plastic strain at the
crack tip on loading, any increase in crack growth rate should be dependent upon the variation
of yield strength of the material with temperature ; for creep resistant steels this would be un-
likely to produce even an order of magnitude increase in crack growth rate. This suggests that
creep crack growth would be rate controlling in these combined fatigue and creep situations.
It might be informative to apply the approach to high strain fatigue tests with hold time which
attempt to simulate particular thermal fatigue cycles. If applicable, certain high strain fatigue
situations could be analysed by using creep crack growth data alone, thereby simplifying testing
procedures and possibly facilitating extrapolation of data to realistic service conditions for
example those involving two-shift operation in power stations. The practical applications of
this work are of great importance and it is to be extended to investigate crack growth rates at
lower stress intensities, different crack and specimen geometries and other systems of stress
applications. Other metallurgical conditions and materials also require study.

6. Conclusions

Creep crack growth rates for 2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel have been correlated with the stress intensity
factor thereby extending the use of fracture mechanics to high temperature situations. This
Int. Journ. of Fracture, 9 (1973) 199-207
Crack propagation under creep conditions in a quenched 2¼ Cr 1 Mo steel                                                207

work has clear application to the assessment of defects in components and is potentially of
great economic value to the power generating industry. Information of this type should allow
defect standards based on fitness for purpose to be formulated and the integrity ofcomponents
containing defects to be assessed quantitatively

Acknowledgement
This paper is published by permission of the Director-General, C.E.G.B., Midlands Region.

REFERENCES

 [1] F. Garofalo, Fundamentals of Creep and Creep Rupture in Metals, Collier-Macmillan Ltd., (1966).
 [2] A. J. Kennedy, Processes of Creep and Fatigue in Metals, Oliver and Boyd (1962).
 [3] D. A. Woodford and R. M. Goldhoff, Mat. Sci. Eng., 5 (1969/70) 303.
 [4] J. A. Williams, Phil. Mag., 20 (1969) 635.
 [5] U. Lindborg, Acta. Met., 17 (1969) 157.
 [6] M. J. Siverns and A. T. Price, Nature, 228 (1970) 760.
 [7] W. Barr and M. J. Siverns, British Welding d., 14 (1967) 238.
 [8] A. T. Price and M. J: Siverns, Metal Construction (1970) 239.
 [9] D. M. Gilbey and S. Pearson, Royal Aircraft Establishment Tech. Rep. 66402 (1966), (obtainable from Her
      Majesty's Stationary Office, London).
[1(3] W. F. Brown and J. E. Srawley, ASTM Spec. Tech. Pub. No. 410 (1966).
[11] R. F. Johnson, M. J. May, R. J. Truman and J. Mickleraith; ISI Pub. 97 (1966) 229.
[12] G. R. Irwin, Proceedings of the 7th Sagamore Ordnance Materials Research Conference, Syracuse University
      Research Institute, (1960) p. IV-63.
[13] A. K. Head, Phil. Mag., 44 (1953) 925.
[14] N. E. Frost and D. S. Dugdale, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 6 (1958) 92.
[15] P.C. Paris and ic. Erdogan, Trans. ASME 85 (1963) 121.
[l 6] A. Coles, G. J. Hill, R. A. T. Dawson and S. J. Watson, Thermaland High-Strain Fatigue International Conference,
      The Metals and Metallurgy Trust (1967) Monograph and Report No. 325, 270.
[17] R. A. T. Dawson, W. J. Elder, C. J. Hill and A. T. Price, Ibid., 239.
[18] T. W. Crooker and E. A. Lange, Fatigue of of Welded Structures Conference (The Welding Institute) (1970) 243.



RI~SUMI~
On a mesur~ les vitesses d'accroissement de fissures dans des 6prouvettes ~ entaille simple et lat&ale d'aciers 2¼ Cr
1 Mo soumis "2 traction/l la temptrature de 565 degrts C. On montre que la vitesse de propagation des fissures de
fluage au cours des essais sur des durtes allant jusqu'~t 2.000 h peut ~tre exprimte par un facteur d'intensit6 de con-
traintes/l l'extrtmit6 d'une fissure aigfie. La corrtlation trouvte s'ttablit sur cinq ordres de grandeur de la vitesse de
propagation. On discute la relation entre ces rtsultats et ceux obtenus par des essais de fluage conventionnels.
   Pour les conditions sp~cifiques de l'essai, le temps ntcessaire h l'amorgage de la fissure Apartir d'une entaille n'entre
pas en ligne de compte par rapport au temps total ntcessaire A la rupture. Sous certaines conditions, on peut observer
des vitesses 61evtes lots de la propagation stable d'une fissure.
   Ces travaux effectuts contribuent manifestement A rtsoudre le probl~me de la v~rification de l'inttgrit6 d'un
616ment contenant des dtfauts et soumis ~tdes conditions de fluage. Une application possible de ces donntes/t l'analyse
d'un cas particulier de fatigue thermique est suggtrte.

 ZUSAMMENFASSUNG
Es wurde die RiBfortpflanzungsgeschwindigkeit in 2¼ Cr 1 Mo-Stahlproben mit einem Seitenkerb, welche bei einer
Temperatur von 565°C einer Zugspannung ausgesetzt wurden, gemessen. Man konnte zeigen, dab die Fortpflan-
zungsgeschwindigkeit yon Dauerstandsrissen bei Versuchen die bis zu 2000 Stunden dauern dureh einen Spannungs-
intensit~itsfaktor an der ExtremiSt eines spitzen Risse~ beschrieben werden kann.
   Es wird eine Korrelation fiber ffinf GrGBenordnungen der RiBfortpflanzungsgeschwindigkeit aufgestellt und der
Zusammenhang zwischen diesen Ergebnissen und den konvantionellen Dauerstandsversuchen wird erl[iutert.
   Fiir die gegebenen Versuchsbedingungen ist die fiir die RiBbildung an einem Kerb erforderliche Zeit im Vergleich
zu der zum Bruch ffihrenden Gesamtdauer unbedeutend. Unter gewiss~ Bedingungen konnte ffir die gleichm~iBige
Riflfortpflanzung hohe Geschwindigkeiten erzielt werden. Diese Arbeit enth~ilt eindeutige MGglichkeiten zur Prfifung
der Integrit~it von Elementen mit Defekten welehe Dauerstandsbedingungen ausgesetzt sind. Es wird auf eine mtg-
liche Anwendung der Ergebnisse auf die Analyse eines speziellen Falles von W~irmeermfidung hingewiesen.




                                                                                 Int. Journ. of Fracture, 9 (1973) 199-207
