                DANU-ISG-2023-01

Material Compatibility for non-Light Water Reactors

              Interim Staff Guidance

                       2023
                                      DANU-ISG-2023-01

                     Material Compatibility for non-Light Water Reactors

                                     Interim Staff Guidance




           ADAMS Accession No.: ML23188A178
OFFICE   NRR/DANU/UTB1           QTE                NRR/DRO/IRAB(PM)   NRR/DANU/UTB1
NAME     ROber                   Azariah-Kribbs     CCauffman          MAudrain
DATE     7/12/2023               4/21/2022          7/13/2023          7/12/2023
OFFICE   NRR/DANU/UTB1/BC        NRR/DNRL/NPHP/BC   RES/DE/CIB/BC      NRR/DANU/UARP/BC
NAME     GOberson                MMitchell          RIyengar           SLynch
DATE     7/17/2023               7/14/2023          8/3/2023           7/31/2023
OFFICE   OGC                     NRR/DANU/D
NAME     VaiseyB                 MShams
DATE     9/18/2023               9/18/2023
                                     OFFICIAL RECORD COPY
                               INTERIM STAFF GUIDANCE

        MATERIAL COMPATIBILITY FOR NON-LIGHT WATER REACTORS

                                     DANU-ISG-2023-01

PURPOSE

This document provides interim staff guidance (ISG) to assist the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC) staff in reviewing applications for construction and operation of non-light
water reactor (non-LWR) designs, including power and non-power reactors. The guidance in
this document identifies areas of staff review that could be necessary for a submittal seeking
to use materials allowed under American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Boiler
and Pressure Vessel Code (ASME Code), Section III, “Rules for the Construction of Nuclear
Facility Components,” Division 5, “High Temperature Reactors” (Section III-5) (ASME,
2017). Section III-5 specifies the mechanical properties and allowable stresses to be used
for design of components in high-temperature reactors (HTRs). However, as stated in
Section III-5, HBB-1110(g), the ASME Code rules do not provide methods to evaluate
deterioration that may occur in service as a result of corrosion, mass transfer phenomena,
radiation effects, or other material instabilities. This ISG identifies information that the staff
should consider as part of its evaluation of a non-LWR application to review applicable
design requirements including environmental compatibility, qualification, and monitoring
programs for safety-related, safety-significant, and, as needed, non-safety-related
structures, systems, and components (SSCs). The actual information necessary for
reviewing qualification and monitoring programs would depend on many factors, such as
plant design, importance to safety of structures, systems, and components, specific
environments, and maturity of research in a given area. The staff should consider these
concepts for non-LWR applications for construction permits or operating licenses under Title
10 of the Code of Federal Regulations (10 CFR) Part 50, “Domestic Licensing of Production
and Utilization Facilities,” and non-LWR applications for design certifications, combined
licenses, standard design approvals, or manufacturing licenses under 10 CFR Part 52,
“Licenses, Certifications, and Approvals for Nuclear Power Plants.”

BACKGROUND

In its review of non-LWR applications, the NRC evaluates whether structural materials will
allow components to fulfill design requirements for the design life, or that adequate
surveillance and monitoring programs are in place. Regulations in 10 CFR Part 50 and
10 CFR Part 52 include requirements for material qualification and performance monitoring.
The staff identified the need for guidance on appropriate qualification, performance
monitoring methods, and in-service inspection to support the staff reviews of applications for
a construction permit or operating license under 10 CFR Part 50 or for a design certification,
combined license, standard design approval, or manufacturing license under
10 CFR Part 52 that proposes to use materials allowed under ASME Section III, Division 5.

New fabrication methods present different material considerations for staff reviews. As an
alternative to conventional manufacturing processes (e.g., forging, castings), an applicant
may propose components fabricated with advanced manufacturing technologies (AMTs),
such as laser powder bed fusion or directed energy deposition additive manufacturing.
These techniques can produce materials with different microstructures or types of defects
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                         Page 2 of 21


    than those of conventional metal manufacturing. Postprocessing requirements may also
    differ. Therefore, it is important that appropriate controls on manufacturing be applied to
    ensure that components with acceptable properties are manufactured and that proper
    testing is conducted to confirm material properties. The information related to AMTs that the
    staff would need to review depends on many factors, including the maturity of the AMT
    process in codes and standards, applicable precedents, as well as the safety and risk
    significance of the intended use of the component. The NRC is in the process of developing
    both generic (NRC, 2021a) and AMT-specific guidelines (e.g., NRC, 2021b) for considering
    the following elements of a submittal that may use AMT components: quality assurance
    (QA), AMT process qualification, supplemental qualification testing, production process
    control and verification, and performance monitoring.

    Non-LWRs present operational environmental challenges to material performance due to
    differences in operating temperatures and types of coolants from currently operating light
    water reactors (LWRs). Operating temperatures of non-LWRs may be significantly higher
    than those currently used in nuclear power plants. Non-LWRs may operate in temperature
    ranges corresponding to the creep regime in which deformation may occur with applied
    stress. The NRC developed Regulatory Guide (RG) 1.87, Revision 2, “Acceptability of
    ASME Code, Section III, Division 5, ‘High Temperature Reactors,’” issued January 2023
    (NRC, 2023a; NRC, 2023b; NRC, 2022a), which endorses the use of Section III-5, with
    conditions. Section III-5 considers mechanical and thermal stresses due to cyclic operation
    and high-temperature creep in air; however, it does not cover degradation that may occur in
    service as a result of radiation effects, corrosion, erosion, thermal embrittlement, or
    instability of the material.1 Another consideration is that the coolants used in non-LWRs are
    significantly different from those used in LWRs. These coolants may be liquid metals (e.g.,
    sodium, lead), liquid salts with or without fuel, helium, or possibly other coolants not yet
    considered. These different coolant environments may increase susceptibility to material
    corrosion, degradation mechanisms, and irradiation effects. Studies have identified the gaps
    in knowledge that exist for some of these coolant types and the impact on the materials
    being considered in the construction and operation of these non-LWR nuclear power plants
    (NRC, 2003; INL, 2006; ANL, 2017; ORNL, 2019; NRC, 2021c; NRC, 2021d; NRC, 2021e;
    EPRI, 2019a; EPRI, 2019b; EPRI, 2020a; EPRI, 2020b). This ISG provides NRC staff
    guidance in reviewing materials areas that are not covered by ASME Section III, Division 5.
    The ISG identifies information the staff should consider in its review related to materials
    qualification. It also indicates where monitoring and surveillance may be appropriate to be
    relied upon to ensure component integrity.

    As noted above, the variety of coolants proposed for non-LWR designs create unique
    operating environments for reactor materials and components. This ISG provides non-
    plant-specific guidance for non-LWRs in the discussion section below. In addition, Parts 1, 2,
    and 3 of this ISG provide technology-specific guidance for molten salt reactors (MSRs),
    liquid metal reactors, and high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, respectively.

    APPLICABILITY

    This ISG is applicable to NRC staff reviews of applications for non-LWR designs, including
    power and non-power reactors, for permits, licenses, certifications, and approvals under
    10 CFR Parts 50 and 52. As stated in the Commission’s Policy Statement on the Regulation
    of Advanced Reactors (73 FR 60612; October 14, 2008), advanced designs are expected to

1      ASME Code, Section III, Division 5, paragraph HAA-1130, “Limits of These Rules”
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 3 of 21


  provide enhanced margins of safety; use simplified, inherent, passive, or other innovative
  means to accomplish their safety and security functions; or both.

  Qualification of non-Code materials is outside the scope of this ISG. However, if an applicant
  adequately qualifies a material to Section III Division 5 rules, the staff should ensure the
  considerations in this ISG are addressed when reviewing compatibility of these materials
  with the respective environments.

  GUIDANCE

  Current Regulatory Framework

  Under 10 CFR 50.34(a)(3)(i), 10 CFR 52.47(a)(3)(i), and 10 CFR 52.79a(4)(i), applicants
  must include principal design criteria (PDC) for the facility.

  Appendix A, “General Design Criteria for Nuclear Power Plants,” to 10 CFR Part 50 applies
  to LWRs but is also considered to be generally applicable to other types of nuclear power
  units and is intended to provide guidance in establishing the principal design criteria for such
  units.

  For non-LWRs, RG 1.232, “Guidance for Developing Principal Design Criteria for Non-Light
  Water Reactors,” issued March 2018 (NRC, 2018), provides proposed guidance for the
  development of PDCs for non-LWR designs. The RG also describes the NRC’s proposed
  guidance for modifying and supplementing the general design criteria to develop PDC that
  address two specific non-LWR design concepts: sodium-cooled fast reactors and modular
  high-temperature gas-cooled reactors. The following criteria are related to material
  qualification for structural materials:

  •      Advanced Reactor Design Criterion (ARDC) 4, Sodium Fast Reactor Design
         Criterion (SFR-DC) 4, and Modular High Temperature Gas-Cooled Reactor Design
         Criterion (MHTGR-DC) 4 states, in part, that SSCs important to safety shall be
         designed to accommodate the effects of and to be compatible with the environmental
         conditions associated with normal operation, maintenance, testing, and postulated
         accidents.

  •      ARDC 14 states that the reactor coolant boundary shall be designed, fabricated,
         erected, and tested so as to have an extremely low probability of abnormal leakage,
         of rapidly propagating failure, and of gross rupture.

  •      ARDC 30, and MHTGR-DC 30 states, in part, that components that are part of the
         reactor coolant boundary shall be designed, fabricated, erected, and tested to the
         highest quality standards practical.

  •      ARDC 31 states, in part, that when stressed under operating, maintenance, testing,
         and postulated accident conditions, (1) the reactor coolant boundary behaves in a
         nonbrittle manner and (2) the probability of rapidly propagating fracture is minimized.

  •      ARDC 32 states that components that are part of the reactor coolant boundary be
         designed to permit periodic inspection and functional testing of important areas and
         features to assess their structural and leak-tight integrity and have an appropriate
         material surveillance program for the reactor vessel.
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                     Page 4 of 21


  •      SFR-DC 71 states, in part, that necessary systems shall be provided to maintain the
         purity of primary coolant sodium and cover gas within specified design limits.

  •      SFR-DC 74 states, in part, that SSCs containing sodium shall be designed and
         located to avoid contact between sodium and water and to limit the adverse effects
         of chemical reactions between sodium and water on the capability of any SSC to
         perform any of its intended safety functions.

  •      SFR-DC 75 states that components that are part of the intermediate coolant
         boundary shall be designed, fabricated, erected, and tested to quality standards
         commensurate with the importance of the safety functions to be performed.

  •      SFR-DC 76 states that the intermediate coolant boundary shall be designed with
         sufficient margin so that, when stressed under operating, maintenance, testing, and
         postulated accident conditions, (1) the boundary behaves in a nonbrittle manner and
         (2) the probability of rapidly propagating fracture is minimized.

  •      SFR-DC 77 states that components that are part of the intermediate coolant
         boundary shall be designed to permit (1) periodic inspections and functional testing
         of important areas and features to assess their structural and leak-tight integrity
         commensurate with the system’s importance to safety and (2) an appropriate
         material surveillance program for the intermediate coolant boundary.

  Although RG 1.232 does not contain design criteria specifically for MSRs, many of the
  criteria in the ARDC and some SFR-DC will likely apply to MSRs. Additionally, an applicant
  using an MSR design may propose additional design criteria not discussed in RG 1.232.
  Additionally, while RG 1.232 does not explicitly consider non-LWR non-power reactors, the
  design criteria listed above may be used to inform the development of PDC related to
  material qualification for structural materials at non-LWR non-power reactors.

  The staff should confirm that sufficient information with regards to materials qualification,
  mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs is provided to
  demonstrate established facility specific PDCs are satisfied.

  Discussion

  Qualification and Performance Monitoring

  This ISG identifies information that the staff should consider during its review of applications
  using ASME Section III, Division 5 qualified materials. An SSC’s performance should be
  demonstrated through a combination of materials qualification programs, supplemental
  testing, and performance monitoring and surveillance programs, which collectively provide
  assurance that a component will meet the design requirements over its intended design life
  in the applicable operating environment.

  Quality assurance (QA) is a process followed to ensure that a component adheres to quality
  requirements (e.g., a program meeting the criteria in Appendix B, “Quality Assurance
  Criteria for Nuclear Power Plants and Fuel Reprocessing Plants,” to 10 CFR Part 50).
  Attributes of a QA program include procedures, recordkeeping, inspections, corrective
  actions, and audits. QA programs establish requirements for process qualification and
  production process control, and possibly also establish requirements for supplemental
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                               Page 5 of 21


    testing, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs. The staff should confirm that
    an appropriate QA program was followed when reviewing a materials qualification program2.

    The selection of structural materials for the reactor design should consider effects on the
    materials properties and allowable stresses due to interactions with the operating
    environment. Materials qualification and monitoring programs should include testing
    conducted, or use of historical data collected, in an environment simulating the anticipated
    operating environment for the reactor, including chemical environment, temperatures, and
    irradiation. It is incumbent upon the applicant to demonstrate that data is directly applicable
    to the plant design and environment. Testing or historical data should account for
    uncertainties in the environment, material composition, fabrication methods, and operating
    conditions. The scope of this testing should include safety-related component materials,
    safety-significant component materials, and, as needed, non-safety related component
    materials whose failure could impact critical design functions. Testing should be conducted
    to determine if materials properties and allowable stresses meet applicable codes and
    standards or other design requirements. If necessary, appropriate reduction factors should
    be applied to the materials properties and allowable stresses from the applicable design
    codes and/or design specifications.

    Performance monitoring and surveillance programs are used in tandem to ensure that the
    component will continue to meet its design requirements until the end of its intended design
    life. While performance monitoring typically consists of inspections or examinations to
    confirm adequate performance and to identify unacceptable degradation, it may also include
    aging management programs or post-service evaluations. Examples of this type of
    performance monitoring that could be appropriate include chemistry, temperature, or flow
    monitoring, as well as wall thickness measurements. Surveillance programs include
    examination of test coupons and components removed from the reactor over the licensed
    operating period. Data gathered from surveillance programs provides physical data which is
    then used to help construct and benchmark models for predicting the degradation of
    components within the reactor. For components for which there is little data on performance
    in similar operating environments and conditions, performance monitoring and surveillance
    programs could be an acceptable way to show that the component will maintain its intended
    function throughout the design life. A component with a significant design margin or one that
    has demonstrated acceptable performance under similar operating environments and
    conditions may require less rigorous performance monitoring and surveillance programs.
    The staff review should include performance monitoring and surveillance programs for SSCs
    that are not planned to undergo periodic inspections and/or functional testing.

    Qualification and performance monitoring should be targeted to provide a holistic aging
    management strategy over the intended design life of the components. ASME Section XI-2
    provides one method for developing a comprehensive aging management strategy, subject
    to NRC acceptance of the proposed program. The NRC endorsed ASME Section XI-2,
    subject to certain conditions, for use by non-LWR applicants and licensees in RG 1.246,
    “Acceptability of ASME Code, Section XI, Division 2, ‘Requirements for Reliability and
    Integrity Management (RIM) Programs for Nuclear Power Plants,’ for Non-Light Water

2
    While a quality assurance program description is not required to be submitted or approved as part of
    a non-power reactor operating license application, as part of its review of an application, the staff will
    determine whether a non-power reactor applicant considered how to appropriately qualify materials to
    support the design and licensing of facilities as part of the development of managerial and
    administrative controls to be used to assure safe operation, as required by 10 CFR 50.34(b)(6)(ii).
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 6 of 21


  Reactors,” issued October 2022 (NRC, 2022b). ASME Section XI-2 requires an applicant to
  develop strategies for inspection, monitoring, and repairing SSCs throughout the design
  lifetime. Although RG 1.246 proposes one method the NRC finds acceptable, applicants
  may propose other methods.

  General Degradation Mechanisms

  Below are degradation mechanisms that are likely to apply across different reactor designs,
  operating environments, and materials. The degradation mechanisms identified reflect the
  current state of knowledge. As additional operating experience and laboratory testing
  become available, the way in which each identified degradation mechanism should be
  addressed may change and new degradation mechanisms may be identified. In the
  meantime, the staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately addressed the
  following general degradation mechanisms for various reactor environments.

  Carburization

  Formation of chromium carbides promotes carburization of structural alloys which can
  increase degradation rates of these materials (Chan 2018, NRC, 2003, NRC 2021d, NRC
  2021e Sridharan, 2019). As noted in the design specific appendices below, there are
  different causes for carburization or decarburization depending on the environment and
  other materials present in the design. The staff should review interactions between graphite
  and carbon impurities in the coolant with metals to ensure that qualification, monitoring,
  surveillance, or inspection programs address potential carburization.

  Corrosion

  The staff should ensure that corrosion is assessed as a function of temperature; time;
  microstructure; coolant composition and chemistry; and coolant flow conditions, including,
  as appropriate, synergistic effects of irradiation. Additionally, localized corrosion, galvanic
  effects, leaching, erosion/wear, and coolant solubility-driven corrosion effects should be
  considered. The staff should confirm that applicants also considered appropriate mitigation
  strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs affected
  by corrosion continue to satisfy the design criteria for the facility.

  Creep and Creep-Fatigue

  The staff should ensure that changes to the materials properties and allowable stresses of
  ASME Code Section III-5, or other applicable design codes, are assessed as a function of
  irradiation time, temperature, and environment. Affected properties include the time-
  dependent allowable stress (St), rupture stress (Sr), creep-fatigue diagram, fatigue curves,
  and isochronous stress-strain curves. The staff should verify that applicants also consider
  appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to
  ensure that SSCs affected by creep-induced degradation mechanisms continue to satisfy
  the design criteria.
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 7 of 21


  Environmentally Assisted Cracking

  The staff should ensure that environmentally assisted cracking mechanisms are assessed,
  including stress corrosion cracking (SCC), intergranular cracking (IGC), and fatigue
  cracking. Based on operating experience and laboratory studies conducted in LWRs, it is
  expected that environmentally assisted cracking is most likely to be significant in weld metal
  or in the heat-affected zone. It is important that component design minimizes the potential
  for crack initiation and that that there is sufficient flaw tolerance to fabrication and service
  cracking. The staff should verify that applicants also consider appropriate mitigation
  strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs affected
  by environmentally assisted cracking continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Flow-Induced Degradation (e.g., Abrasion, Erosion, Cavitation)

  The staff should ensure that abrasion and erosion of SSCs in contact with the coolant are
  assessed as a function of temperature, time, microstructure, coolant composition and, as
  appropriate, chemistry and coolant flow conditions. In addition to potentially undergoing
  activation, thus contributing to the coolant’s activation level, erosion products from SSCs
  have the potential for depositing elsewhere in the coolant flow path, affecting coolant flow
  patterns and local heat transfer properties. Additionally, staff should ensure pumps are
  qualified and tested under operating conditions and coolant flow paths and flow rates are
  evaluated to minimize the potential for cavitation. The staff should confirm that applicants
  also consider appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance
  programs to ensure that SSCs affected by abrasion and erosion continue to satisfy the
  design criteria.

  Flow-Induced Vibration

  The staff should evaluate the effects of coolant flow-induced vibrations, which may cause
  fretting and fretting-assisted fatigue. In addition, the staff should confirm that the flow-
  induced excitations do not have a frequency close to the natural frequency of the system.
  The staff should confirm that applicants also considered appropriate mitigation, performance
  monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs affected by flow-induced
  vibration continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Irradiation

  The staff should evaluate data on the effects of neutron irradiation on materials, including
  mechanisms such as irradiation-assisted creep, irradiation embrittlement, irradiation
  assisted SCC, helium embrittlement (Briggs, 1969), and decreased resistance to oxidation.
  The staff should also evaluate the potential for irradiation-induced swelling in alloys,
  particularly for alloys containing appreciable amounts of nickel. Asymmetrical irradiation can
  potentially change component dimensions or mechanical properties such that they no longer
  meet their design function(s). As such, irradiation effects on such components must be
  considered. In addition, the staff should consider how activation and fission products in the
  coolant may accelerate or introduce new irradiation-assisted degradation mechanisms. The
  staff should verify that applicants also consider appropriate performance monitoring and
  surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs affected by irradiation continue to satisfy the
  design criteria. Test specimens within the reactor that can be withdrawn (e.g., coupon
  specimens irradiated during reactor operations) and tested throughout the operating phase
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 8 of 21


  of the reactor could be an appropriate supplement to a materials qualification program; for
  example, to support longer lifetimes or supplement areas with minimal existing data.

  Guidance related to the irradiation and oxidation of graphite is provided in RG 1.87, Rev 2
  “Acceptability of ASME Code, Section III, Division 5, ‘High Temperature Reactors,’” issued
  January 2023 (NRC, 2023a), which endorses ASME Code Section III, Division 5, subject to
  limitations and conditions. NUREG-2245, “Technical Review of the 2017 Edition of ASME
  Code, Section III, Division 5, ‘High Temperature Reactors,’” issued January 2023 (NRC,
  2023b), contains the technical basis for RG 1.87. It should be noted that, in general,
  irradiation induced changes to graphite material properties will undergo a reversal (i.e.,
  increasing values will change to decreasing values) with increasing received neutron dose
  after reaching the “turnaround dose”. Turnaround dose is the critical dose level where this
  change occurs and indicates when the graphite material irradiation induced dimensional
  volumetric densification reverses to a volumetric expansion behavior. For example, the
  strength of irradiated graphite will increase gradually as the dose increases up to the
  turnaround dose and then will rapidly decrease as dose continues to increase. The
  exception to this irradiated material behavior is thermal diffusivity, which experiences an
  immediate and significant decrease in value followed by a gradual decrease in value with
  increasing accumulated dose after reaching the turnaround dose.

  Stress Relaxation Cracking

  The staff should ensure that the potential for stress relaxation cracking (SRC) is assessed.
  As per RG 1.87, applicants should submit a plan for addressing SRC. Also called “reheat
  cracking,” SRC is a mechanism that causes accelerated creep cracking in the weld
  heat-affected zone due to relaxation of residual stresses. It can lead to premature failure of
  components in high-temperature service. Several factors, including, but not limited to, weld
  residual stresses, cold work, larger grain sizes, multiaxial stresses, notches, and constraints
  caused by the weld joint design, promote SRC. SRC occurs in austenitic alloys within
  specific temperature ranges characteristic for each individual alloy (Colwell and Shargay,
  2020; Shoemaker et al., 2007; van Wortel, 2007; Miller, 1998; API, 2017; NRC, 2019;
  ASME, 2020; ASME, 2021). Factors to reduce susceptibility include heat treatments, control
  of alloy composition, control of grain size, and controls on welding (Colwell and Shargay,
  2020; van Wortel, 2007; Shoemaker et al., 2007). The staff should confirm that applicants
  consider appropriate preventive measures during design, construction, and operation, such
  as in the event of post-startup weld repairs.

  Thermal Aging

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addresses the effects of
  thermal aging on metallic components over the design life of the reactor. Microstructural
  changes as a result of thermal aging are known to result in changes to the mechanical
  properties of metallic alloys—specifically, a decrease in ductility and fracture toughness.
  Thermal aging may also result in a decrease of corrosion resistance due to the formation of
  metallic carbides involving elements expected to form protective oxide layers.

  The staff should verify that applicants consider appropriate mitigation strategies,
  performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs affected by thermal
  aging continue to satisfy the design criteria. If surveillance testing coupons are to be used to
  measure the effect of thermal aging on the mechanical properties of metallic components,
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                     Page 9 of 21


  the conditions chosen should be the most conservative, which may not necessarily be at the
  highest operating temperatures.

  Thermal Emissivity

  Emissivity is important in calculating heat transfer during operation and accident scenarios,
  and generally, higher emissivity is desired to assist in radiating heat (NRC, 2021c). Surface
  roughness can affect emissivity. In addition, the thermally grown surface oxide or carbide
  can affect emissivity.

  The staff should confirm that applicants have considered the impact of exposure to the
  coolant or ambient air at elevated temperatures on the emissivity of materials if the reactor
  design specifications rely on thermal emissivity (e.g., for heat rejection). Considerations
  should include changes to emissivity due to prolonged exposure during normal operating
  conditions and changes induced under accident conditions.

  Thermal Fatigue and Transients

  The staff should evaluate whether an application adequately addresses thermal fatigue and
  transients. These include: (1) the effects of startup testing, which may introduce additional
  thermal fatigue damage for which the plant was not designed; (2) the potential for thermal
  striping and thermal stratification, which may occur when coolant streams at different
  temperatures mix in the vicinity of a component (e.g., a heat exchanger or nozzle); and (3)
  load following, which may increase the potential for thermal fatigue. To minimize the
  potential for thermal striping or stratification, the staff should ensure that the application
  addresses the system design and operational criteria for components with the potential of
  thermal expansion mismatch caused by the mixing of coolant flows at different
  temperatures. The staff should ensure that very high cycle fatigue due to thermal striping
  has been adequately addressed by the applicant.

  The staff should also consider potential thermal transients (including startup and shutdown)
  and the impacts on the reactor that are not addressed through ASME Code design rules.
  For example, operational experience has shown that thermal transients in HTRs can loosen
  shrink-fit components. The staff should confirm that applicants also consider appropriate
  mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that
  SSCs affected by thermal fatigue and transients continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  The staff should verify that, whenever applicable, synergistic effects of thermal fatigue,
  vibratory fatigue, and creep-fatigue are addressed by the applicant.

  Coolant Flow, Wear, and Fretting

  The staff should consider the potential impacts of the specific coolant environment on wear
  and fretting, particularly in heat exchangers and steam generators. Reactor operation may
  be affected by tribological effects such as friction, wear and fretting. Depending on the
  reactor design, the interaction between the coolants (as a result of wear and fretting) in the
  primary, secondary, and steam-generating loops may have adverse consequences for the
  reactor. For example, fretting of steam generator tubing in sodium fast reactors has
  historically caused tube leaks that resulted in highly exothermic sodium-water reactions.
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 10 of 21


  Due to the soft nature of graphite and composite core components, the coolant flow as well
  as any entrained particles in the coolant may induce wear. Important factors for the staff to
  consider during its review include the coolant density, coolant velocity, and whether dust or
  small particulates from previous wear could be present.

  General Materials Issues

  Below are materials topics that are likely to apply to a variety of reactor designs, coolants,
  and materials. The issues identified reflect the current state of knowledge. As additional
  operating experience and laboratory testing become available, the way in which each
  identified issue should be addressed may change and new issues may be identified. The
  staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately addressed the following design
  neutral materials issues as appropriate for their specific application and design.

  Advanced Manufacturing Technologies

  The staff should evaluate whether an application containing AMT components considers
  (1) the differences between the AMT and traditional manufacturing methods; (2) the safety
  significance of the identified differences; (3) the aspects of each AMT that are not currently
  addressed by codes and standards or regulations; and (4) the impacts of the proposed
  reactor type, operating conditions, and material on the AMT qualification and performance. It
  is particularly important that an application fully addresses AMT material performance at
  high temperatures. Limited studies have shown long-term creep, fatigue, and creep-fatigue
  properties may be reduced compared to wrought material values (INL 2020, INL 2021). The
  staff should confirm that applicants also consider appropriate mitigation strategies,
  performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs fabricated by
  AMTs continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Metallic Materials Qualification

  The staff should verify that metallic materials to be used in structural components in all
  reactor designs have been qualified for use in a representative environment. Specifically, the
  metallic materials should be tested under conditions representative of the anticipated
  operating environment in terms of temperature, impurity levels, and the potential for
  oxidation, carburization, decarburization, and other degradation mechanisms, as
  appropriate, resulting from the reactor environment. The staff should review metallic
  cladding (ORNL, 2021) to ensure it is qualified in a representative environment with
  additional considerations given to adherence to their metallic substrate and galvanic
  coupling. The staff should confirm that applicants also consider appropriate mitigation
  strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that metallic
  materials and coatings continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Ceramic Insulation

  The staff should evaluate whether an application adequately addresses environmental
  effects of ceramic insulation. The staff should confirm an application considers chemical
  compatibility of ceramic insulation with the coolant (Sauvage, 1979) and the potential for off-
  gassing from ceramic insulation. The staff should be aware that off-gassing may affect the
  performance of sensors located near the insulation during operational, anticipated
  operational occurrences and accident conditions (Guidez, J. and Prèle, G., 2017).
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 11 of 21


  Dissimilar Metal Welds

  Section III-5 provides stress rupture factors to account for the reduced creep strength of
  welds for the five materials approved for use in Class A, high-temperature components, but
  these factors do not generally apply to dissimilar metal welds (DMWs), such as welds
  between ferritic low-alloy steels and austenitic alloys. These bimetallic welds may have
  creep lifetimes less than those of either the ferritic low-alloy steel or austenitic alloy
  (EPRI, 2020a). Different coefficients of thermal expansion for the weld constituents and
  high-temperature solid-state diffusion driven compositional gradients in different alloys are
  two examples of metallurgical phenomena that can contribute to the reduced lifetime of
  DMWs. Therefore, the staff should evaluate whether the potential lower lifetimes of DMWs,
  particularly between ferritic low-alloy steels and austenitic alloys, have been adequately
  addressed. The staff should verify that applicants have also considered appropriate
  mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that
  DMWs continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Monolithic Silicon Carbide, Carbon-Carbon Composites, and Silicon Carbide Composites

  The thermomechanical properties, irradiation behavior, and corrosion resistance of
  monolithic silicon carbide (SiC), carbon-carbon composites (C/C) and silicon carbide
  composites (SiC/SiC), will depend on the manufacturing method, porosity, and chemical
  purity (ORNL, 1995; Snead, 2007; ORNL, 2018).

  The staff should be aware that nonmetallic composites have the potential for use in non-
  LWR designs. The 2021 edition of ASME Section III, Division 5, provides a qualification
  program for nonmetallic composites, which the staff should consider in the review of these
  materials; however, the staff has not reviewed or endorsed this portion of the Code at the
  time of writing this ISG (ASME, 2021).

  The variability of properties of SiC/SiC will include all the processing parameters affecting
  monolithic SiC for the constituent parts of the composite, e.g., the fibers, matrix, and
  fiber/matrix interface in addition to synergistic effects between the constituent parts of the
  composite.

  The NRC staff should review the compatibility of composites with the coolant environment
  based on the factors discussed above. The staff should confirm that applicants consider
  appropriate monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs fabricated with
  these composites continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Gaskets and Seals

  The staff should verify when reviewing the application that all gaskets and seals are
  chemically compatible with the coolant and consider the consequences of corrosion
  products from the gaskets and seals entering the coolant as well as the consequences of
  gasket/seal failure on the reactor operation. The staff should also verify that applicants
  consider appropriate mitigation, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to
  ensure that gaskets/seals in contact with coolant continue to satisfy the design criteria.
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                      Page 12 of 21


  Reactor-Specific Guidance, Part 1: Molten Salt Reactors

  Below are additional degradation considerations likely to apply to MSRs that the staff should
  consider in its review. MSR designs fall into two categories: liquid fuel and solid fuel. In a
  liquid-fuel MSR, the fissile material is directly dissolved in the coolant. In a solid-fuel MSR,
  the fissile material and fission products are typically contained within a TRISO (tristructural
  isotropic particle fuel) fuel particle, which could be in a prismatic graphite compact or
  pyrolytic graphite sphere. Additionally, relatively small quantities of fission products may be
  present in the molten salt coolant. MSRs can use a fast neutron or thermal neutron
  spectrum. Both types of MSR designs operate at near ambient pressures. Molten salt is
  generally corrosive to traditional metallic SSCs. Corrosion can be enhanced by galvanic
  coupling and, in the case of liquid-fuel MSRs, interactions with fissile material and fission
  products. The Molten Salt Reactor Experiment prototype at Oak Ridge National Laboratory
  is the only reported example of an operational power MSR (EPRI, 2019a). This section
  offers details on the design and/or environment specific aspects of the general degradation
  mechanisms described in the “General Degradation Mechanisms” section above. The staff
  should evaluate whether applicants have adequately addressed the following materials
  issues, including plans to monitor, evaluate, and mitigate degradation.

  Graphite

  Graphite-salt compatibility considerations include fluorination of the graphite and formation
  of carbides (uranium carbide, chromium carbide, and others), as well as potential infiltration
  of molten salt into the graphite (NRC, 2021d). The staff should confirm that graphite
  qualification, monitoring, surveillance, or inspection programs address any potential
  chemical compatibility issues, as applicable.

  Formation of chromium carbides promotes carburization of structural alloys, which can
  increase degradation rates of these materials (Chan 2018, NRC 2021d). The staff should
  review interactions between graphite and metals to ensure that qualification, monitoring,
  surveillance, or inspection programs address potential carburization.

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the potential for
  formation of uranium and other metal carbides on graphite, and subsequent deleterious
  effects on reactor materials (EPRI, 2019a; NRC, 2021d).

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the potential for
  enhanced corrosion caused by graphite in contact with metallic materials. Increased
  corrosion of the stainless steel has been observed when graphite and 316L stainless steel
  are present in the same electrochemical environment (Qiu et al., 2020).

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed whether the
  porosity or grain size of the graphite components allows for salt infiltration. If so, the effects
  of salt intrusion into the graphite should be assessed to determine if this causes any
  cracking or flaw generation in the graphite, thereby shortening the effective life of the
  graphite.

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the potential for
  molten salt to accelerate the wear, abrasion, and/or erosion between graphite components.
  The staff should verify that applicants also considered appropriate mitigation strategies,
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                     Page 13 of 21


  performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs fabricated with
  graphite continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Materials Considerations

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the potential for
  additional degradation concerns in liquid fueled MSRs when the fissile material is dissolved
  in the coolant. Fission products will also contribute to the contaminants in the liquid salt and
  must be considered in the effects on materials wetted by the salt.

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the potential for
  tellurium (Te)-induced cracking in structural alloys and evaluate mitigation strategies,
  performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs satisfy the design
  criteria. Te has led to IGC of nickel-based alloys (ORNL, 1977; ORNL, 1978). Based on
  electron probe microanalysis, X-ray diffraction, and transmission electron microscopy
  (Ignatiev, 2013), Te-induced IGC is likely caused by preferential diffusion of Te along the
  grain boundaries, followed by formation of the brittle metallic telluride compounds on the
  grain boundaries and the interface of intergranular carbides.

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed whether radiation
  damage to the molten salt could increase its corrosivity due to radiolytic decomposition of
  the salt over applicable temperature ranges, which may lead to deleterious effects on
  structural performance. Recombination rates were shown to be fast relative to radiolytic
  decomposition at high temperatures but not at lower temperatures (ORNL, 1970).

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed whether corrosion
  products from structural alloys could affect degradation rates for SiC/SiC composites used
  as structural components (excluding fuel, as this is not within the scope of this guidance).
  For example, chromium carbides may be formed by Cr3+ from Hastelloy N which may cause
  accelerated corrosion of SiC (ORNL, 2018).

  The staff should confirm that applicants also considered appropriate mitigation strategies,
  performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs in all environments
  continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Salt Composition

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the effects of salt
  composition on the degradation of metallic and nonmetallic materials due to molten salt,
  which may lead to deleterious effects on structural performance due to increasing the
  likelihood of crack initiation or a reduction in strength or ductility. The staff should consider
  the effects of oxidizing impurities, as well as the impact of reducing agents. Oxidizing
  impurities include fission products (although these may be limited in a fluoride salt cooled
  high-temperature reactor design), as well as water and air, and tritium for salts that contain
  lithium (EPRI, 2019a; NRC, 2021d). Tritium can increase the corrosivity of a lithium-bearing
  molten salt (NRC, 2021d) by forming tritium fluoride.
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                 Page 14 of 21


  The staff should also evaluate whether the application adequately considered the
  effectiveness of methods to control salt composition and the redox chemistry of the salt
  (Olander, 2002). These could include the following:

     •       gas phase control (e.g., HF/H2)
     •       major metal control (e.g., Be2+/Be)
     •       dissolved salt control (e.g., U4+/U3+ or Ce3+/Ce4+)

  The staff should verify that applicants considered appropriate mitigation strategies,
  performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that salt composition does not
  exceed allowable limits that are needed to ensure that component integrity satisfies the
  design criteria.

  Reactor-Specific Guidance, Part 2: Liquid Metal Reactors

  Liquid metal reactors are characterized by their operation at or near ambient pressure using
  a fast neutron spectrum in which the fuel, with metallic cladding, is cooled by liquid sodium,
  lead, or the lead-bismuth eutectic ((LBE, 44.5 wt% Pb and 55.5 wt% Bi)). The sodium-
  cooled fast reactor (SFR) has had decades of experience at the experimental, prototype,
  and commercial scales. The lead fast reactor (LFR) uses liquid lead or LBE as the coolant
  (EPRI, 2019b) and the design concepts span a range of operating temperatures from 550–
  800 degrees C. To date, operational experience with LFRs is limited to the development of
  LBE-cooled reactors for the Alfa-class submarines operated by the Soviet Union from 1967–
  1983 (EPRI, 2019b; Alemberti, 2014; IRSN, 2012,). More recently, however, construction
  began on the first prototype lead-cooled reactor, the BREST-OD-300, in 2021 in the Russian
  Federation (Proctor, 2021). This section offers details on the design and/or operating
  environment-specific aspects of the general degradation mechanisms described in the
  “General Degradation Mechanisms” section above.

  Sodium Coolant

  Below are additional degradation considerations likely to apply to sodium-cooled liquid metal
  reactors that the staff should consider in its review. The staff should evaluate whether
  applicants have adequately addressed these considerations. The staff should also ensure
  that applicants consider appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and
  surveillance programs to address these considerations, such that component integrity
  satisfies the design criteria.

  Caustic Stress-Corrosion Cracking

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the potential for
  caustic SCC, characterized by transgranular and intergranular cracking of a metal in contact
  with the caustic solution. For example, in the presence of moisture, metallic sodium forms
  sodium hydroxide, which can induce caustic SCC in some alloys. Certain components, such
  as steam generators, are more susceptible to the ingress of moisture and therefore to
  caustic cracking caused by sodium hydroxide (NRC, 2019). Operational experience of the
  Phoénix reactor demonstrated austenitic stainless steels used in the steam generator were
  vulnerable to caustic SCC following small leaks and subsequent repairs (Sauvage, 1979).
  Higher nickel alloys are less susceptible to caustic SCC (Jones, 1992). The staff should
  verify that designs minimize the potential for interaction of sodium with water such that the
  potential for caustic SCC is minimized and that applicants considered appropriate mitigation
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                   Page 15 of 21


  strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to minimize the potential for
  caustic SCC, to ensure that component integrity satisfies the design criteria.

  Exothermic Reactivity with Water

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the potential for
  molten sodium to react with water or moisture in the air to confirm that the design
  demonstrates that the potential for this phenomenon is minimized. Molten sodium
  undergoes a violent exothermic reaction on contact with water, which is a particular concern
  in the vicinity of steam generators (NRC, 2021e). Many such incidents from previously
  operating SFRs are documented (NRC, 2021e). The staff should verify that applicants
  minimize the potential for a sodium-water reaction through design, and that applicants
  considered appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance
  programs to minimize the potential for contact between molten sodium and water or
  moisture in the air.

  Impurity Effects on Corrosion

  The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the temperature,
  flow rate, and impurity limits in the sodium coolant (notably, oxygen and carbon) since these
  parameters have a significant impact on the corrosion rate of metallic components in contact
  with the sodium coolant (Thorley and Tyzack, 1967; ANL, 2017; NRC, 2021e), which may
  lead to deleterious effects on structural performance due to increasing the likelihood of crack
  initiation or a reduction in strength or ductility. Studies conducted with varied levels of
  oxygen suggest that, to reduce oxidation and dissolution and maximize the lifetime of
  structural materials (mainly stainless steels) in SFRs, the oxygen level in sodium should be
  monitored and controlled to levels acceptable for a specific reactor design (Argonne, 1978,
  Hanford, 1980, NRC 2021e).

  The staff should be aware that data from short-term (2,000 hours) static testing indicate that
  SiC/SiC may be resistant to corrosion from high-purity sodium (1 weight parts per million) at
  550 degrees C, but the corrosion resistance decreases with an increasing concentration of
  oxygen in the sodium (Braun et al., 2021).

  The staff should evaluate the applicant’s proposed mitigation strategies, performance
  monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that appropriate limits are set and
  maintained for key parameters for corrosion (e.g., flow rate and impurities, in particular
  oxygen).

  Liquid Metal Embrittlement

  The staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately addressed liquid metal
  embrittlement (LME), as applicable, for metallic components in SFR. Some alloys are
  susceptible to LME in sodium, such as T91 steel (9Cr-1Mo-V) (Hemery et al., 2013). The
  staff should evaluate whether proposed mitigation, monitoring, and surveillance programs to
  manage LME are adequate.

  Carburization and decarburization

  The staff should be aware of the potential sources of sodium impurity corrosion mechanisms
  such as carbon in the sodium. Decarburization and carburization are both well documented
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 16 of 21


  in sodium reactors. Carbon impurity in the liquid sodium or transferred between materials in
  the liquid can induce carburization of heat exchangers, structural steels and control fuel rods
  in the reactor (NRC 2021e). The staff should evaluate that the potential for carburization and
  decarburization of structural alloys is controlled and to ensure that there are appropriate
  measures to maintain appropriate liquid sodium during plant design life.

  Lead Coolant

  A “lead-cooled” reactor may use lead (Tmelt, 327.5 degrees C) or LBE alloy (Tmelt,
  123.5 degrees C) as the coolant. Metallic elements used in structural alloys, including iron,
  nickel, and chromium, are all soluble in lead or LBE, and that solubility in either coolant is a
  strong function of temperature (Ballinger and Lim, 2003; EPRI, 2019b). Above a certain
  temperature threshold, the use of typical ferritic and austenitic steels may require special
  treatments, such as alloying additions or coatings (EPRI, 2019b). It should be stressed that
  specific data on the environmental impact of molten lead and LBE on materials are not
  interchangeable since, for the same temperature, LBE is typically more corrosive than pure
  lead (NEA-OECD, 2015)

  Below are additional degradation considerations likely to apply to lead-cooled liquid metal
  reactors. The staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately addressed the
  following materials issues, including plans to monitor, evaluate, and mitigate degradation.

  Corrosion at Higher Temperatures

  Many alloys, including those approved for Section III-5 use, can experience high corrosion
  rates in a lead or LBE environment at higher temperatures, defined here as greater than
  550 degrees C. For example, rapid corrosion of Type 316 stainless steel occurs above
  550 degrees C even with tight oxygen control because of the transition from a protective to a
  nonprotective oxide (EPRI, 2019b). The staff should evaluate an applicant’s supporting test
  data over the entire range of operating temperatures to ensure that the designer has
  adequately characterized how the coolant may affect the mechanical properties of materials,
  including material susceptibility to LME (Gorse et al., 2011).

  Effect of Flow Velocity

  Increasing coolant flow velocities increase the effects of corrosion and should be considered
  (IRSN, 2012; Ballinger, and Lim, 2003). Studies have shown that decreasing flow velocity
  can control erosion for lead and LBE (Allen T.R. and Crawford D.C., 2007) and for pure lead
  coolant (Vogt, J.B. and Proriol Serre, I., 2021). Limiting flow velocities are not absolute but
  are temperature- and material-dependent. Higher flow velocities may be acceptable,
  especially for lower operating temperatures. The staff should review temperature, flow
  velocities and dissolved oxygen to accurately consider the combined effects of erosion and
  corrosion.

  Liquid Metal Embrittlement

  The staff should confirm that the applicant has adequately addressed the potential for LME
  of alloys used in lead-cooled reactors. LME is characterized by significant loss of ductility,
  caused by embrittlement of the grain boundaries of the solid alloy component and can also
  reduce creep life in some alloys. LME can be severe, depending on the alloy, operating
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                   Page 17 of 21


  temperature, and stress level of the affected components (EPRI, 2019b; OECD, 2007;
  Gorse et al., 2011).

  Exposure to a lead or LBE environment has been shown to degrade the mechanical
  properties of some alloys, including ductility, fatigue resistance, and creep life.
  Ferritic/martensitic steels such as T91 (9Cr-1Mo-V) are more severely affected than
  austenitic steels (Type 316L) (Gorse et al., 2011). The staff should evaluate an applicant’s
  material selection and supporting data to ensure that the potential effects of the lead or LBE
  environment on mechanical properties have been adequately addressed.

  The staff should also confirm that the applicant has adequately addressed the effects of
  previous plastic deformation (e.g., cold work), which may affect the corrosion resistance of
  an alloy. The severity of dissolution corrosion attack in Type 316L stainless steel was found,
  in LBE coolant, to increase with increasing percentages of cold work (Klok et al., 2017).

  The staff should verify that the applicant considered appropriate mitigation strategies,
  performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to minimize the potential for LME such
  that component integrity satisfies the design criteria.

  Nonmetallic Materials

  SiC/SiC has shown resistance to liquid metal corrosion up to 550 degrees C in 2000 hr
  corrosion tests in flowing liquid LBE (Takahashi, M. and Kondo, M.). Since experience with
  nonmetallics in lead or LBE environments is very limited, the staff should confirm that any
  use of nonmetallic materials in lead or LBE environments is supported by test data for the
  materials of interest in the relevant environment.

  Oxygen Control

  The corrosion potential of alloys in lead- and LBE-cooled fast reactors is highly dependent
  on temperature and the dissolved oxygen concentration in the coolants (EPRI, 2019b; Klok
  et al, 2018. Oxygen control is an important technique to ensure satisfactory performance of
  structural materials in lead- and LBE-cooled reactors. This technique, widely used in lead-
  based test facilities worldwide (Tarantino M., et al., 2021), consists of maintaining the
  oxygen concentration in the coolant within controlled limits. Corrosion rates at temperatures
  below 450 degrees Celsius are very low, and satisfactory operation in this temperature
  range can be achieved using many materials, including stainless steels and alloy steels
  (Ballinger and Lim, 2003). Strict oxygen control is necessary over the relevant range of
  temperatures and over the entire geometry of the coolant system, including local pockets or
  regions of off-chemistry coolant anywhere in the system, to maintain the protective oxide
  layer and avoid dissolution of alloying elements (EPRI, 2019b; Ballinger and Lim, 2003).

  If oxygen concentration exceeds the solubility limits in the lead or LBE coolant, precipitation
  of lead oxide can occur, which can cause clogging of heat exchangers, as well as other
  detrimental effects on systems (OECD, 2007; IRSN, 2012). The staff should evaluate
  whether applicants considered appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring,
  and surveillance programs to ensure that the dissolved oxygen content in the lead or LBE
  coolant is controlled so that component integrity satisfies the design criteria.
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 18 of 21


  Reactor-Specific Guidance, Part 3: High-Temperature Gas Reactor

  High-temperature gas-cooled reactors can use helium or carbon dioxide (CO2) coolant;
  however, reactors that use CO2 as the coolant, such as the Advanced Gas Reactor in the
  United Kingdom, are not currently expected to be deployed in the United States. Therefore,
  the following only addresses additional degradation considerations that are likely to apply to
  helium-cooled high-temperature gas-cooled reactors. Helium-cooled reactor designs under
  consideration in the United States include the high-temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR),
  the very high-temperature gas-cooled reactor, and the gas-cooled fast reactor (GFR),
  described in EPRI, 2020a. Common features of these designs include a reactor outlet
  temperature greater than or equal to 700 degrees Celsius. There is considerable operating
  experience from previous gas-cooled reactors operating in the United States and overseas
  (summarized in INL, 2011, and NRC, 2019). All these reactor designs are helium cooled,
  with the exception of the Advanced Gas Reactor and Magnox reactors in the United
  Kingdom. This section offers details on the design and/or environment-specific aspects of
  the general degradation mechanisms described in the “General Degradation Mechanisms”
  section above. The staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately addressed the
  materials issues discussed below.

  Creep-Rupture Strength

  Service in a helium coolant environment has been shown to reduce the creep-rupture
  strength of structural alloys, in some cases resulting in lower creep-rupture strength than
  specified in ASME Code Section III-5 (Kim et al., 2013; Corwin, et al., 2008; NRC, 2021c).
  The staff should ensure that the potential for reduced creep-rupture strength within a helium
  coolant is accounted for in design analyses. The staff should confirm that applicants also
  considered appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance
  programs to ensure that SSCs that could be impacted by lowered creep-rupture strength
  continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Emissivity

  Emissivity is important in calculating heat transfer during operation and accident scenarios,
  and generally, higher emissivity is desired to assist in radiating heat (NRC, 2021c). Surface
  roughness can affect emissivity. In addition, the thermally grown surface oxide or carbide
  can affect emissivity on both the inside and outside of HTGR RPV. Within the RPV and
  primary loop SSCs, chemistry of the helium environment can have a significant effect on
  emissivity that should be accounted for in heat transfer calculations (NRC, 2021c). The staff
  should be aware of the potential for impurities in the helium coolant to affect the emissivity of
  structural alloys, as well as oxidizing impurities and abrasion or coating of metallic surfaces
  by graphite dust, which are other possible mechanisms for emissivity changes (NRC,
  2021c). The staff should confirm that applicants also considered appropriate mitigation
  strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs
  continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Graphite

  The staff should confirm that test data used to measure the coefficient of friction for graphite
  were gathered under conditions representative of operating temperatures and impurities in
  the coolant. The staff should be aware that the coefficient of friction for graphite is
  dependent on the graphite grade, temperature, and coolant impurities. The staff should be
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                    Page 19 of 21


  aware that impurities in the coolant have the potential to decrease the coefficient of friction
  (NRC, 2021g).

  Graphite Dust

  The staff should verify that applicants have adequately addressed the impact of graphite
  dust and debris in the coolant loop, which can be produced from the contact and movement
  of the pebbles or movement of the graphite blocks caused by temperature gradients, coolant
  flow, or vibrations (NRC, 2019). Graphite dust accumulations can decrease the efficiency of
  heat exchanger piping, hinder complete movement of the fuel or the control rod, and
  agglomerate on piping, clogging the flow of helium (NRC, 2002). Operational experience has
  demonstrated that graphite dust can also abrade piston rings in helium gas circulators,
  creating more dust in the primary loop and degrading the performance of the helium gas
  compressors (NRC, 2019). The staff should also be aware that graphite dust can carry
  absorbed fission products if fuel failure has occurred. The staff should confirm that
  applicants also considered appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and
  surveillance programs to ensure that graphite dust is kept at acceptable levels so that SSCs
  continue to satisfy the design criteria.

  Helium Impurities

  Many operational issues in HTGRs have resulted from moisture intrusion into the helium
  coolant (NRC, 2019). The staff should therefore carefully evaluate the design aspects or
  operating practices that control moisture ingress. The main impurities present in helium
  coolant are water (H2O), carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH4), hydrogen (H2), and
  nitrogen (N2). H2O and CO affect oxidation, CO and CH4 affect carburization, and H2O
  affects decarburization (NRC, 2003; Sridharan, 2019). An Idaho National Laboratory (INL)
  report shows typical concentrations of these impurities in previously operating VHTRs (INL,
  2006).

  The staff should be aware of the potential sources and mechanisms of formation of
  impurities in the helium coolant. H2O and O2 present in the helium react with hot graphite in
  the core to form CO and H2. CO2 degassing from graphite also converts to CO. Corrosion
  reactions with alloys may also produce H2 and CO. CH4 can come from the leakage of oils
  (such as lubricants for circulators) or from the radiolytic reaction of H2 with graphite (NRC,
  2003; Sridharan, 2019). The staff should identify potential sources of impurities that could be
  introduced to the gas based on the specific design.

  The staff should evaluate whether there is a favorable environment that leads to a stable
  oxide film and stable internal carbides (INL, 2006) and avoids excessive carburization,
  surface carburization, and decarburization. Other environmental factors to evaluate are the
  effects of temperature, alloy composition, and other impurities (NRC, 2021c). Figure 7 in
  NRC 2021c shows a schematic of favorable coolant gas characteristics to avoid rapid
  carburization or decarburization. Carburization can increase creep strength but decrease
  ductility, while decarburization can decrease lifetime by removing carbide strengthening
  phases. The staff should evaluate the coolant gas composition to ensure that the potential
  for carburization, decarburization, and oxidation of structural alloys is controlled and to
  ensure that there are appropriate measures to maintain appropriate gas composition during
  plant design life. HTGRs operated to date have maintained the total impurity levels in the
  helium below 10 parts per million to minimize these effects (INL, 2006).
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                   Page 20 of 21


  Silicon Carbide and Silicon Carbide Composites

  The staff should evaluate the use of SiC and SiC/SiC composites in HTGRs and consider
  the potential sources and effects of coolant impurities on these materials. For example, SiC
  and SiC/SiC may be susceptible to long term degradation under low partial pressures of
  oxygen (Choi, H., et al., 2021; EPRI, 2020a).

  Lubricants

  The staff should evaluate the use of oil lubricants in HTRs. Operational experience with
  HTRs has repeatedly demonstrated that coolant loops in different HTRs have been
  contaminated with oil-based lubricants (NRC, 2019), with deleterious impacts on the coolant
  purity.

  IMPLEMENTATION

  The staff will use the information discussed in this ISG to review non-LWR applications for
  construction permits and operating licenses under 10 CFR Part 50 and combined licenses,
  standard design approvals, design certifications and manufacturing licenses under
  10 CFR Part 52 that propose to use materials allowed under ASME Section III, Division 5.

  BACKFITTING, ISSUE FINALITY, AND FORWARD FITTING DISCUSSION

  The NRC staff may use DANU-ISG-2023-01 as a reference in its regulatory processes, such
  as licensing, inspection, or enforcement. However, the NRC staff does not intend to use the
  guidance in this ISG to support NRC staff actions in a manner that would constitute
  backfitting as that term is defined in 10 CFR 50.109, “Backfitting,” and as described in NRC
  Management Directive 8.4, “Management of Backfitting, Forward Fitting, Issue Finality, and
  Information Requests.” The staff also does not intend to use the guidance to support NRC
  staff actions in a manner that constitutes forward fitting as that term is defined and described
  in Management Directive 8.4. If a licensee believes that the NRC is using this ISG in a
  manner inconsistent with the discussion in this paragraph, then the licensee may file a
  backfitting or forward fitting appeal with the NRC in accordance with the process in
  Management Directive 8.4.

  CONGRESSIONAL REVIEW ACT

  This ISG is a rule as defined in the Congressional Review Act (5 U.S.C. §§ 801–808).
  However, the Office of Management and Budget has not found it to be a major rule as
  defined in the Congressional Review Act.

  PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT

  This ISG provides voluntary guidance for implementing the mandatory information
  collections in 10 CFR Parts 50 and 52 that are subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of
  1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501 et. seq.). These information collections were approved by the Office
  of Management and Budget (OMB), approval numbers 3150-0011 and 3150-0151. Send
  comments regarding this information collection to the FOIA, Library, and Information
  Collections Branch (T6-A10M), U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC
  20555 0001, or by e-mail to Infocollects.Resource@nrc.gov, and to the OMB reviewer at:
  OMB Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs (3150-0011 and 3150-0151), Attn: Desk
DANU-ISG-2023-01                                                                 Page 21 of 21


  Officer for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 725 17th Street, NW Washington, DC
  20503.

  FINAL RESOLUTION

  The staff will transition the information and guidance in this ISG into RG 1.87 or NUREG
  series, as appropriate. Following the transition of all pertinent information and guidance in
  this document into the RG or NUREG series, or other appropriate guidance, this ISG will be
  closed.

  APPENDICES

  A Analysis of Public Comments on Interim Staff Guidance (ISG): Material Compatibility for
    Non-Light Water Reactors
  B References
                                 DANU-ISG-2023-01 APPENDIX A



                             Analysis of Public Comments on
    Interim Staff Guidance (ISG): Material Compatibility for Non-Light Water Reactors


Comments on the subject draft Interim Staff Guidance (ISG) are available electronically at the
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s (NRC’s) electronic Reading Room at
http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/adams.html. From this page, the public can access the
Agencywide Documents Access and Management System (ADAMS), which provides text and
image files of the NRC’s public documents. The following table lists the comments the NRC
received on the draft ISG.

                     ADAMS
Letter Number                                  Commenter Affiliation           Commenter Name
                  Accession No.
       1          ML23069A091         Public                                   A. Thomas Roberts
       2          ML23076A284         Engie-Tractebel                          Michel Desmet
       3          ML23130A195         Hybrid Power Technologies LLC            Michael Keller
                  ML23130A196
                  ML23130A202
       4          ML23130A205         Public                                   Anonymous
                  ML23130A206
                  ML23130A207
       5          ML23130A208         NEI                                      Mark Richter
                  ML23130A209
                  ML23130A210
       6                              Public                                   Anonymous
                  ML23130A211
                  ML23130A212
       7          ML23130A213         EPRI                                     Chris Wax
       8          ML23194A112         INL                                      Sam Sham

The original comment as written by the commenter in its letter above is listed first, followed by
the NRC staff’s response.

Letter 1— Allen Thomas Roberts

Comment No. 1-1

While some advanced reactor designs operate at high temperatures and are expected to be
subject to the listed degradation mechanisms (DMs), some also operate at very low pressures.

Hence pressure loads might sometimes be negligible compared to potential seismic loadings.

While seismic loading is accounted for under ASME III Division 5, the seismic load effects on
some materials and the ISG identified degradation mechanisms may be lacking sufficient
guidance for license applicants to be mindful of what the USNRC may expect especially in term
of functionality.




                                                 A-1
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 2 of 26


For example, a prismatic core of graphite may experience a critical turnaround dose level and
the graphite strength will increase gradually up to that turnaround dose but then rapidly
decrease in strength after turnaround. However, the diminished in-situ strength of a prismatic
graphite core following turn around would not likely prevent it from serving its control rod bank
shutdown function, provided there is no misalignment of prismatic blocks that would preclude
control rod insertion that resulted from a seismic load.

While there are several listed DMs that may or may not have functionality impacts because of
seismic loading versus traditionally emphasized pressure loads, it is recommended that a
caution be provided in the ISG regarding DMs that may be functionally affected in concert with
seismic loadings.

NRC Response

The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. Component design, including
seismic load effects, is outside of the scope of this ISG.

Comment No. 1-2

Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT) produced products are anticipated to be utilized in
several advanced reactors. While these materials may exhibit some mechanical and chemical
properties comparable to their traditionally produced counterpart products (e.g., forged, cast,
etc.), the microstructures for these materials are likely to be very different.

Consequently, inspections (e.g., NDE) and monitoring of SSCs produced using AMT processes
may result in the need to adjust and confirm the suitability of presently used NDE techniques
(e.g., UT, ET, AE, etc.) assuming that traditional NDE methods are employed to monitor these
AMT produced SSCs.

As cited in several studies, AMT examined material when UT examined results in different
sound attenuation properties than their counterpart traditionally produced products. These
potential differences in AMT material characteristics are the principal reason that ASME Section
XI Division 2, Reliability Integrity Management (RIM), noted in this ISG, requires performance
demonstration of all selected monitoring or NDE methodology for assessing potential
deterioration of an SSC over its service life.

This performance demonstration (PD) and the derived numerical output is an essential element
required by RIM, because the PD is factored back into the Reliability Target value(s) that is
established and assigned to risk significant SSCs.

It is recommended that this ISG provide brief guidance on monitoring and NDE methodologies
that might be anticipated to be utilized on AMT produced items. This guidance would not only
serve the USNRC staff reviews but inform license applicants of matters they should consider.

NRC Response

The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. The ISG provides guidance on
evaluation of environmental degradation and materials issues. Guidance on specific monitoring
and NDE methodologies is outside of scope for this ISG. The ISG is not intended to be
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 3 of 26


prescriptive in methods to demonstrate acceptability of SSCs, traditionally fabricated or those
fabricated from AMTs.

Comment No. 1-3

As an extension of Comment 2, the use of Silicon Carbide (SiC), Carbon-Carbon (C/C), and
Silicon Carbide (SiC/SiC) composites in risk significant SSC is an area that should be cautioned
for the need to conduct performance demonstration of monitoring and NDE methodologies
proposed to be employed on over their service life.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment but determined that changes to the document are out of
scope of the ISG. Therefore, staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. Staff
believes that demonstrating effectiveness of monitoring and NDE methodologies is important for
all components, not just those fabricated with non-metallic materials.

Comment No. 1-4

As noted in the technology specific portions of the ISG, several reactor technologies are cited as
being potentially susceptible to corrosion related mechanisms (e.g., Caustic Stress-Corrosion
Cracking, Impurity Effects on Corrosion, etc.).

The ability to effectively provide monitoring or even NDE techniques for these DMs that might
occur in risk significant SSCs should be highlighted as possibly needing consideration of a
systematic approaches to monitor for these possible DMs (e.g., in-situ chemistry monitoring
systems, installed transducers for wall thickness monitoring, etc.) rather than the traditionally
focused NDE approaches to mostly look only at weld locations.

Providing this guidance would not only serve during the USNRC staff reviews but also inform
licensee applicants of matters they should consider.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment, in part. The ISG does not define specific monitoring or NDE
technologies that should be implemented; however, providing examples would help clarify the
intent of the phrase “performance monitoring.” The following statement will be added to page 5,
Qualification and Performance Monitoring, “Examples of this type of performance monitoring
that could be appropriate include chemistry, temperature, or flow monitoring, as well as wall
thickness measurements.”

Letter 2 – Engie-Tractebel

Comment No. 2-1

Page 9, "Thermal Fatigue and Transients", 1st paragraph, before last line: stripping to be
corrected to striping.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated this comment.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 4 of 26


Comment No. 2-2

Page 9, "General Materials Issues", 1st paragraph, 3rd line: 'the need to...' to be replaced by
'there is a need to...’?

NRC Response

The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. The paragraph was edited in
response to comment 7-5 and no longer contains this wording.

Letter 3 – Hybrid Power Technologies LLC

Comment No. 3-1

The proposed staff guidance clearly demonstrates that the NRC staff considers that the ASME
Code does not adequately protect the public from hazardous radiation. The thin justification
provided for the NRC staff’s position is deeply troubling, particularly in light of the ASME Code’s
long history of successfully governing boilers, pressure vessels, and reactors. Stated somewhat
differently, the NRC staff apparently does not consider that the ASME Code properly and
proportionately provides for the Safety Related and allied tiered Important-to-Safety functions
that form the backbone of the entire regulatory process. Rather than unilaterally imposing NRC
Staff desires on licensees and applicants, the NRC Staff should collaborate with the ASME to
reach a mutually acceptable code. The proposed staff guidance contains a number of technical
considerations whose linkages to proportional risk-informed technical design considerations are
not apparent. The staff’s technical design considerations unilaterally impose wide ranging and
obtuse technical justification requirements on reactor materials, irrespective of the proportional
level-of-risk to fundamental safety functions, and ultimately the hazardous radiation risk to the
public. The interests of the public and industry are better served by reliance on the well proven
ASME Code because the code specifically considers, in-depth, items such as service
conditions, proper design margins, proper design methods, and in-service inspections.

The ISG does not cite the specific section(s) of the code that form the basis for the NRC staff
claims. In general, limitations on code rules are, in part, of the form

       do not cover deterioration that may occur in service as a result of radiation effects,
       corrosion, erosion, thermal embrittlement or instability of the material. These effects shall
       be taken into account with a view to realizing the design or the specified life of the
       components and supports. The changes in properties of materials subjected to neutron
       radiation may be checked periodically by means of material surveillance programs.

NRC Staff claim that the code does not address environmental conditions is simply not true.

The ASME Code has been developed through the collective historical wisdom of hundreds
industry experts and firms integrally involved in the design, manufacture, construction, and
operation of boilers, reactors, and pressure vessels. By contrast, the regulatory bureaucracy’s
expertise does not lie in these areas. That same observation applies to national laboratories.
The NRC staff should comply with Congress’ explicit direction contained in the Act by reaching
agreement on a collaboratively developed ASME Code.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                            Page 5 of 26


NRC Response

The staff disagrees and made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. It is expected that
an applicant would use Division 5 for the design and qualification, as applicable, of materials, as
conditioned by RG 1.87. This ISG is intended to provide staff guidance on addressing
environmental effects that are not included in the scope of Division 5.

ASME Section III, Division 5, HAA-1130 “LIMITS OF THESE RULES” specifically states that
Division 5 rules “…do not cover deterioration that may occur in service as a result of radiation
effects, corrosion, erosion, thermal embrittlement, or instability of the material. These effects
shall be taken into account with a view to realizing the design or the specified life of the
components and supports. The changes in properties of materials subjected to neutron radiation
may be checked periodically by means of material surveillance programs.”

Comment No. 3-2

Attempting to use lower-tier discretionary regulatory guidance to bludgeon highly technical
justification requirements onto licensees and applicants is of highly questionable flexibility,
practicality, and authority. The issue is particularly troubling for technical considerations well
removed from materially impacting the public as a result of remotely likely hazardous radiation
releases.

We have observed an NRC Staff propensity to use regulatory guides and similar lower tier
documents to create new de facto technical requirements when the staff does not get their way
during code and standard development activities. The areas of disagreements are generally
associated with arcane technical considerations well removed from materially affecting
fundamental nuclear safety concerns. With the passage of the Act, such behavior is not
permissible.

In conjunction with the 10CFR53 development effort, we have previously formally expressed
concerns over the NRC staff overriding codes and standards using lower tier regulatory
guidance documents – see regulations.gov, comment section of docket NRC-2019-0062.

We note that the NRC staff was, in fact, part of the development process for the subject ASME
Code and had ample opportunity to reach a collaboratively agreed to code. The ASME Code
development process is fully transparent and unquestionably fair as all comments and concerns
are forthrightly openly discussed and resolved. The ASME process stands in stark contrast with
the NRC staff’s secretive regulatory approach, as amply demonstrated by the 10CFR53 process
involving hundreds of pages of unresolved comments and concerns. In closing, in our opinion,
the proposed guidance fails to properly comply with the Act in a number of key areas and is
therefore of doubtful legality. The NRC staff should avoid using lower tier guidance to impose de
facto technical justification requirements in an attempt to preempt the lawful domain of industry
codes and standards. The document should be withdrawn and not issued.

NRC Response

The staff disagrees and made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. The staff have
processes to endorse industry Codes, and recently completed its endorsement of the 2017
edition of ASME Section III, Division 5. In areas where there is not industry guidance, or areas
where the NRC does not endorse industry guidance, NRC staff develops guidance documents
such as ISGs and RGs to fill that void. In this instance, Division 5 does not provide guidance on
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                            Page 6 of 26


environmental testing/compatibility, except for graphite, beyond stating that those effects should
be taken into account. In addition, this is staff guidance and does not impose additional
requirements on applicants beyond those in Division 5, as applicable.

Letter 4 – Anonymous

Comment No. 4-1

On May 22, 2007, OMB issued Memorandum M-07-16, Safeguarding Against and Responding
to the Breach of Personally Identifiable Information, which required Federal agencies to publish
a routine use for their systems of records specifically applying to the disclosure of information in
connection with response and remedial efforts in the event of a breach of personally identifiable
information. FWS published a notice in the Federal Register in 2008 to modify all FWS system
of records by adding a routine use in their “ROUTINE USES” section to address the limited
disclosure of records.

NRC Response

The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment as it is outside the scope of the
ISG.

Letter 5 – NEI

Comment No. 5-1

Section: General

Comment/Basis: For performance monitoring and surveillance, would it be acceptable to have
materials from the same heat tested in a simulated environment?

Recommendation: Allow materials from the same heat to be tested in a simulated environment
to satisfy the surveillance requirement.

NRC Response

The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. It is outside the scope of the ISG
to make a general determination on acceptability of specific performance monitoring,
surveillance, material qualification, or inspection methods.

Comment No. 5-2

Section: General

Comment/Basis: Several of the sections on degradation mechanisms end with the statement:
“The staff should confirm that applicants also consider appropriate mitigation strategies,
performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs affected by corrosion
continue to satisfy the design criteria.”

Recommendation: It is suggested to be more specific on which “design criteria” the ISG refers to
at the end, for example by saying “…to satisfy the principal design criteria.”
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 7 of 26


NRC Response

The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. It is out of scope of this ISG to
determine if appropriate principal design criteria have been determined by an applicant.

Comment No. 5-3

Section: Qualification and Performance Monitoring

Comment/Basis: The following paragraph mentions testing, but it does not specifically allow for
the use of data from previous facilities within the same parametric operating envelope.

Materials qualification and monitoring programs should include testing conducted in an
environment simulating the anticipated operating environment for the reactor, including chemical
environment, temperatures, and irradiation. Testing should account for uncertainties in the
environment, material composition, fabrication methods, and operating conditions. The scope of
this testing should include safety-related component materials, safety-significant component
materials, and as needed, non-safety related component materials whose failure could impact
critical design functions. Testing should be conducted to determine if materials properties and
allowable stresses meet applicable codes and standards or other design requirements. If
necessary, appropriate reduction factors should be applied to the materials properties and
allowable stresses from the applicable design codes and/or design specifications.

Recommendation: Guidance should be updated to allow for the use of data from previous
facilities within the same parametric operating envelope.

NRC Response

The staff agrees, in part, with this comment. Historical data could be appropriate to use if
directly applicable to supplement materials qualification and testing programs. The staff has
updated the ISG to include the italicized text:

       “The selection of structural materials for the reactor design should consider effects
       on the materials properties and allowable stresses due to interactions with the
       operating environment. Materials qualification and monitoring programs should
       include testing conducted, or use of historical data collected, in an environment
       simulating the anticipated operating environment for the reactor, including
       chemical environment, temperatures, and irradiation. It is incumbent upon the
       applicant to demonstrate that data is directly applicable to the plant design and
       environment. Testing or historical data should account for uncertainties in the
       environment, material composition, fabrication methods, and operating conditions.
       The scope of this testing should include safety-related component materials,
       safety-significant component materials, and as needed, non-safety related
       component materials whose failure could impact critical design functions. Testing
       should be conducted to determine if materials properties and allowable stresses
       meet applicable codes and standards or other design requirements. If necessary,
       appropriate reduction factors should be applied to the materials properties and
       allowable stresses from the applicable design codes and/or design specifications.”
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 8 of 26


Comment No. 5-4

Section: Qualification and Performance Monitoring, page 6, first paragraph

Comment/Basis: The ISG says: “In the meantime, staff should evaluate whether applicants have
adequately addressed the following general degradation mechanisms for various reactor
environments.”

Recommendation: It is suggested that the extent to which such degradation mechanisms should
be addressed should be commensurate with their safety significance. A possible rewording
could be: “In the meantime, staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately
addressed the following general degradation mechanisms for various reactor environments, to
an extent which should be commensurate with the safety significance of the degradation
mechanism.”

NRC Response

The staff has made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. The ISG is sufficiently clear
that the scope of the ISG is for safety-related component materials, safety-significant
component materials, and as needed, non-safety related component materials whose failure
could impact critical design functions.

Comment No. 5-5

Section: Qualification and Performance Monitoring, page 6, last paragraph

Comment/Basis: When saying: “Erosion products from SSCs have the potential for depositing
elsewhere in the coolant flow path, affecting coolant flow patterns and local heat transfer
properties,” it is suggested to also say that these erosion products may undergo activation, thus
contributing to the activity of the coolant itself.

Recommendation: A possible wording could be: “In addition to potentially undergoing
activation thus contributing to the coolant’s activation level, erosion products from SSCs have
the potential…. heat transfer properties.”

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this clarification and has incorporated the comment.

Comment No. 5-6

Section: Qualification and Performance Monitoring, page 9, first paragraph

Comment/Basis: Correct typo: “striping” in place of “stripping” within the sentence: “The staff
should ensure that very high cycle fatigue due to thermal stripping has been adequately
addressed by the applicant.”

Recommendation: none
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                            Page 9 of 26


NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated the comment.

Comment No. 5-7

Section: Qualification and Performance Monitoring, page 9, end of “Thermal and Fatigue
Transients”

Comment/Basis: It is suggested to add “whenever applicable” within the sentence: “The staff
should verify that synergistic effects of thermal fatigue, vibratory fatigue, and creep-fatigue are
addressed by the applicant” so that it reads: “The staff should verify that, whenever applicable,
synergistic effects of thermal fatigue, vibratory fatigue, and creep-fatigue are addressed by the
applicant”

Recommendation: none

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated the comment.

Comment No. 5-8

Section: Qualification and Performance Monitoring, page 9, “Wear/Fretting”

Comment/Basis: It is suggested to clarify the following paragraph: “The staff should consider the
potential impacts of the specific coolant environment on wear and fretting, particularly in heat
exchangers in steam generators. Depending on the reactor design, the interaction between the
coolants in the primary, secondary, and steam generating loops may have adverse
consequences for the reactor with regard to wear and fretting.”

Recommendation: Specifically, “in heat exchangers” and “in steam generators” seem to be a
duplication, and the latter can be deleted. Moreover, when speaking about “interaction between
coolants,” it is not clear whether the subject interaction is between the coolants, or between the
coolants and the heat exchanger structures. This part would benefit from a rewording.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment and has clarified the intent of the paragraph, which now
states, “heat exchangers and steam generators” and also clarifies the interaction between the
coolants is as a result of wear and fretting.

Comment No. 5-9

Section: Page 9, first paragraph under “General Materials Issues”

Comment/Basis: The ISG says: “The staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately
addressed the following design neutral materials issues as appropriate for the application and
design.” It is suggested to indicate that the extent with which such design neutral material issues
should be addressed should be commensurate with their safety significance.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                             Page 10 of 26


Recommendation: A possible rewording could be: “The staff should evaluate whether applicants
have adequately addressed the following design-neutral materials issues as appropriate for the
application and design, to an extent which should be commensurate with the safety significance
of each issue.”

NRC Response

The staff has made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. The ISG is sufficiently clear
in the Discussion that the scope of the ISG is for safety-related component materials, safety-
significant component materials, and as needed, non-safety related component materials whose
failure could impact critical design functions.

Comment No. 5-10

Section: Page 11

Comment/Basis: Graphite-salt compatibility considerations include fluorination of the graphite
and formation of carbides (uranium carbide, chromium carbide, and others), as well as potential
infiltration of molten salt into the graphite (ORNL, 2021a.)

Recommendation: Comment 1: ORNL, 2021a is missing in the draft ISG as a reference.

Comment 2: The fact that fluorination is the first stated compatibility issue might be concerning.
There is no relevant data that fluorination is a real thing for all engineering purposes (although it
is mentioned in the literature). At most, this should be demonstrated with a test program and not
require monitoring.

Comment 3: Formation of carbides is not a concern for the graphite itself (see comment 1 below
for Page 12).

Comment 4: Infiltration should be demonstrated with a test program and not require monitoring.
Dispensing with monitoring might require more data from the test program to show infiltration is
not occurring and/or effective infiltration is not safety significant. Infiltration is a greater concern
for fuel salt MSRs because the fissile material in the salt could create localized high temperature
regions, e.g., "hotspots" and xenon accumulation.

NRC Response

Comment 1: The staff has corrected a typographical error regarding the misattributed reference.

Comment 2-3: The staff disagrees with this comment. Fluorination and the formation of carbides
are discussed in the corrected reference, which is why they are included as possible
mechanisms in the ISG. Therefore, no changes have been made to the ISG to address these
comments.

Comment 4: While the staff agree testing programs might be appropriate for infiltration, the staff
finds that monitoring and NDE could also be demonstrated to be viable methods to ensure a
component is capable of meeting design criteria. Staff have made the following edits to clarify
the section: “The staff should confirm that graphite qualification, monitoring, surveillance, or
inspection programs address any potential chemical compatibility issues, as applicable.”
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 11 of 26


Comment No. 5-11

Section: Page 11, first paragraph under “Reactor Specific Guidance, Part 1: Molten Salt
Reactors”

Comment/Basis: It is recommended to correct the definition of MSRs operating with solid fuel,
as the ISG indicates that in these MSRs “the molten salt coolant has relatively small amounts of
fissile material and fission products,” which is not true as the fissile material is contained within
the fuel, not the coolant. In addition, when referring to TRISO later in the same paragraph, it is
suggested to indicate that, although dominant, this is “just” an example of solid fuel used in
solid-fuel MSRs.

Recommendation: none.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated the comment. The section now states: “In a solid-
fuel MSR, the fissile material and fission products are typically contained within a TRISO fuel
particle…additionally, relatively small quantities of fission products may be present in the molten
salt coolant”.

Comment No. 5-12

Section: General Degradation Mechanisms - Irradiation

Comment/Basis: Guidance notes that: “The staff should evaluate data on the effects of neutron
irradiation on materials, including mechanisms such as irradiation assisted creep, irradiation
embrittlement, irradiation-assisted SCC, and decreased resistance to oxidation.”

Recommendation: Given that III-5 does not provide specific acceptable means to account for
irradiation effects on structural material properties, the guidance should be updated to provide
additional detail on staff expectations for review or acceptable means to account for
irradiation effects on structural material properties.

NRC Response

The staff disagrees this is a necessary addition and made no changes to the ISG resulting from
this comment. Given the wide variety of operating conditions, materials and coolants in high
temperature reactors and the current state of knowledge, it is not practical to provide specific
guidance to resolve this comment. The ISG does not provide specific guidance for any of the
other degradation mechanisms or materials issues.

Comment No. 5-13

Section: General Degradation Mechanisms: Silicon Carbide

Comment/Basis:

   1. SiC is captured in the General Materials Issues section with the main takeaway that all
      SiC types should be qualified separately.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                          Page 12 of 26


   2. For the reactor specific guidance sections, molten salt and liquid metal reactors (sodium
      and Lead coolant) both specifically call out SiC but strangely there is no SiC reference
      under HTGRs. Given this is where GA-EMS is most focused, perhaps we should look to
      add something in there.
          a. Under the section “Reactor Specific Guidance, Part 3: High Temperature Gas
              Reactor”, the document states that “NRC is not aware of any current plans to
              deploy GFR reactors in the Unites States, so this section does not address
              materials concerns for GFRs.”
   3. Not all of the degradation mechanisms are broadly applicable to all candidate reactor
      materials. For instance, stress relaxation cracking is an identified mechanism in heat
      affected zone of alloy welds but is not an expected damage mechanism in silicon
      carbide material.

Recommendation:

   1. It should be acknowledged that degradation mechanisms are fundamentally different in
      SiC-SiC composites compared to metals (Jacobsen, GA-EMS, JNM, 452, p125-132,
      2014). The staff should be aware that different mechanisms (e.g. - matrix cracking, fiber
      sliding) and different analytical techniques (e.g. – Weibull analysis) must be considered
      to account for the stochastic behavior of SiC materials.
   2. This is an issue that needs to be resolved. GA-EMS is developing the Fast Modular
      Reactor with the intent to deploy in the US, and this design leverages non-metallic
      materials, specifically SiC/SiC composite due to its demonstrated high temperature
      performance and compatibility with Helium coolant (Choi, GA-EMS, ANS Transactions,
      124, p454-456, 2021). As is written above in the molten salt and metal coolant sections,
      the staff should be aware of the potential sources and impacts of impurities in the Helium
      and the effects these have on SiC/SiC performance and degradation mechanisms.
   3. There should be an avenue to specify if certain mechanisms aren’t applicable to a
      material system or plant design, in addition to the stated feasibility of adding additional
      mechanisms.

NRC Response

Comment 1: The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. The staff agrees
the mechanical characteristics of nonmetallic matrix composites are uniquely different from
metals, however, the staff does not see the need to explicitly state this in the ISG. The ISG
contains a reference to the 2021 edition of ASME Section III, Division 5 which acknowledges the
differences between nonmetallic matrix composites and metals.

Comment 2: The staff agrees that use of SiC and composites are appropriate to consider for
unique performance and compatibility in HTGRs and has added a section on silicon carbide to
this section of the ISG. The staff has incorporated comment 2a into the ISG.

Comment 3: The staff disagrees and made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. For
all degradation mechanisms identified in the ISG, it is incumbent on the applicant to determine
and justify if they are or are not applicable. Further, it is generally not possible to eliminate a
priori particular degradation mechanisms without knowledge of the design, environment, and
material combination.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                          Page 13 of 26


Comment No. 5-14

Section: Page 12

Comment/Basis: The staff should evaluate whether the application adequately addressed the
potential formation of uranium and other metal carbides on graphite, and subsequent
deleterious effects on reactor materials (EPRI, 2019a.)

Recommendation: Per the EPRI report, the only concern with metal carbide forming on graphite
seems to be related to corrosion of metals, not related to degradation of the graphite itself. Also,
the concern with uranium carbide for fuel-salt MSRs is related to “nuclear performance”
(neutronics), not graphite degradation. This evaluation should be removed as a compatibility
issue.

NRC Response

The staff disagrees with the comment and added a reference to NRC 2021d supporting the
staff’s position that formation of uranium and other metal carbides on graphite should be
addressed in an application.

Comment No. 5-15

Section: Liquid Metal Reactors – Caustic Stress Corrosion Cracking

Comment/Basis: Although it is noted that most steam generators, both tubes and shell, are
made of ferritic steels, austenitic stainless steels have been used successfully in previous
sodium fast reactor steam generators (e.g., EBR-II and the Prototype Fast Reactor (PFR)
operated on the Dounreay site).

Recommendation: Guidance should be updated to reflect this operational experience.

NRC Response

The staff has modified the language in response to the comment to highlight the importance of
operating experience, particularly with the use of austenitic steels for steam generator tubing in
the French Phoénix reactor. The staff found multiple references (listed below) stating the EBR-II
steam generator tube material were ferritic steel alloyed with chromium and molybdenum and
so, disagrees with the comment. The staff notes the failure of approximately 40 steam
generator tubes in the Prototype Fast Reactor (PFR) caused by the sodium-water reaction. The
staff notes, however, the source of the damage to the PFR steam generator tubes was caused
by residual weld stresses.

Buschman H.W., Penney H.W., and Longua K.J., "Operating Experience of the EBR-II
Intermediate Heat Exchanger in the Steam Generator System,” ASME/IEEE Joint Power
Generation Conference in Indianapolis, Indiana, September 25-29, 1983.

Buschman H.W., Penney H.W., and Longua K.J., "The EBR-II Steam Generating System –
Operation, Maintenance, and Inspection," IAEA-IWGFR Specialists' Meeting on Maintenance of
LMFBR Steam Generators in Oarai Japan, June 4-8, 1984.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                          Page 14 of 26


International Atomic Energy Commission, “Fast Reactor Database: 2006 Update,” IAEA-
TECDOC-1531, 2006.

Comment No. 5-16

Section: Liquid Metal Reactors – Impurity effects on corrosion

Comment/Basis: Successfully operated sodium fast reactors (e.g., the Experimental Breeder
Reactor-II) and standards developed for SFR systems have established maximum acceptable
oxygen levels in sodium of 2 ppm.

“EBR-II Operating Experience,” Section 5.2, “Source Rate of Impurities,” (1978) notes that
“EBR-II operating limits for primary sodium are 2.0 ppm oxygen and 200 ppb hydrogen. Normal
concentrations are ~0.8 ppm oxygen and ~90 ppb hydrogen.” RDT A 1-5T, “Purity
Requirements for Operating Sodium Reactor Systems,” (1973) specifies an oxygen
concentration limit of up to 2.0 ppm for hot leg temperatures >800 F.

Recommendation: While it is noted that higher oxygen concentration has been seen to increase
the corrosion rates of steels in a sodium environment, the guidance should be updated to reflect
that oxygen levels of 2 ppm have been shown to be acceptable.

NRC Response

The staff disagrees that a specific oxygen level should be provided; however, found it
appropriate to make the following change, as indicated in italics, to the ISG for added clarity:

       “Studies conducted with varied levels of oxygen suggest that, to reduce oxidation
       and dissolution and maximize the lifetime of structural materials (mainly stainless
       steels) in SFRs, the oxygen level in sodium should be monitored and controlled to
       levels acceptable for a specific reactor design (Argonne, 1978, Hanford 1980, NRC
       2021e).”

Comment No. 5-17

Section: Page 13, first paragraph under Liquid Metal Reactors

Comment/Basis: When introducing LBE it is suggested to indicate the composition of this
eutectic, for example by adding it at the end of the sentence: “Liquid metal reactors are
characterized by their operation at or near ambient pressure using a fast neutron spectrum in
which the fuel, with metallic cladding, is cooled by liquid sodium, lead, or the lead-bismuth
eutectic (LBE, 44.5 wt% Pb and 55.5 wt% Bi).” This is to clarify that the composition of this
eutectic is very far from pure Pb.
Recommendation: none

NRC Response

The staff agrees that the addition provides clarity and incorporated the comment.

Comment No. 5-18

Section: Page 13, first paragraph under Liquid Metal Reactors
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                         Page 15 of 26



Comment/Basis: When saying: “To date, operational experience with LFRs is limited to
propulsion nuclear reactors in Alfa-class submarines operated by the Soviet Union
from 1967–1983,” it is suggested to specify that these reactors were LBE-cooled.
Recommendation: A possible rewording could be: “To date, operational experience with LFRs
is limited to LBE-cooled propulsion nuclear reactors in Alfa-class submarines operated by the
Soviet Union from 1967–1983.”

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and incorporated the comment with a minor modification and added an
additional reference.

Comment No. 5-19

Section: Page 15, first paragraph under “lead coolant”

Comment/Basis: The ISG says: “As a result, use of typical ferritic and austenitic steels requires
special treatments, such as alloying additions or coatings (EPRI, 2019b).”

Recommendation: It is recommended to correct this sentence, as the need for “special
treatments” is not absolute but depends on the temperature. Specifically, typical steels do not
require special treatments when the temperature is below approx. 480C, which is the operating
temperature for internals operating at cold leg temperature. A possible rewording could be: “As
a result, when the temperature is above approximately 480°C, use of typical ferritic and
austenitic steels require special treatments, such as alloying additions or coatings (EPRI,
2019b).”

NRC Response

The staff agrees there is a temperature relationship and incorporated the comment, with
modification. The ISG now states, “Above a certain temperature threshold, the use of typical
ferritic and austenitic steels may require special treatments, such as alloying additions or
coatings (EPRI, 2019b).”

Comment No. 5-20

Section: Page 15, end of first paragraph under “lead coolant”

Comment/Basis: It is suggested to more strongly emphasize the (correct) statement:” Specific
data of the environmental impacts of molten lead and LBE on materials are not
interchangeable,” as the two are often confused. A proposed rewording is: “It should be
stressed that specific data on the environmental impact of molten lead and LBE on materials are
not interchangeable since, for the same temperature, LBE is typically more corrosive than pure
lead (Ref. X).” where Ref. X is: NEA-OECD, Handbook on Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy and
Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics and Technologies. 2015 edition

Recommendation: none
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                       Page 16 of 26


NRC Response

The staff agrees with and incorporated the comment.

Comment No. 5-21

Section: Page 15, second paragraph under “lead coolant”

Comment/Basis: The ISG says: “The staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately
addressed the following materials issues, including plans to monitor, evaluate, and mitigate
degradation.” It is suggested to add that the extent to which this is addressed should be
commensurate with the safety significance of the degradation mechanism.

Recommendation: A proposed rewording could be: “The staff should evaluate whether
applicants have adequately addressed the following materials issues, including plans to monitor,
evaluate, and mitigate degradation, in a way commensurate with the safety significance
associated with each degradation mechanism.”

NRC Response

The staff has made no changes to the ISG based on this comment. The ISG is sufficiently clear
in the Discussion that the scope of the ISG is for safety-related component materials, safety-
significant component materials, and as needed, non-safety related component materials whose
failure could impact critical design functions.

Comment No. 5-22

Section: Page 15, last paragraph

Comment/Basis: It is suggested to add an indication of the temperature range and additional
references at the end of the following sentence:

“Non-code-qualified materials such as alumina forming or aluminum-coated stainless steels and
silicon-enriched stainless steels may provide enhanced corrosion resistance in LBE and lead
coolants at high temperatures (EPRI, 2019b; OECD, 2007; Ballinger and Lim, 2003)”, so that it
reads:

“Non-code-qualified materials (…) in LBE and lead coolants at high temperatures up to at least
700-750°C (EPRI, 2019b; OECD, 2007; Ballinger and Lim, 2003; Ref. A, Ref. B, Ref. C, Ref. D,
Ref. E)” where the references are:

Ref. A: F. García Ferré, et al., “Corrosion and radiation resistant nanoceramic
coatings for lead fast reactors,” Corrosion Science, 124 (2017) 80-92.

Ref. B: DOMSTEDT, P., LUNDBERG, M., SZAKALOS, P., Corrosion Studies of Low-Alloyed
FeCrAl Steels in Liquid Lead at 750 °C. Oxidation of Metals (2019)
91:511–524. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11085-019- 09896-z

Ref. C: DOMSTEDT, P., et. al., (2020), Corrosion studies of a low alloyed Fe–10Cr–4Al steel
exposed in liquid Pb at very high temperatures. Journal of Nuclear Materials. 531. 152022.
10.1016/j.jnucmat.2020.152022.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                          Page 17 of 26



Ref. D: CHEN, L., et al., Investigation of microstructure and liquid lead corrosion behavior of
a Fe-18Ni-16Cr-4Al base alumina-forming austenitic stainless steel. Mater. Res. Express 7
(2020) 026533. https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1591/ab71d1

Ref. E: PINT, B.A., SU, Y.F., BRADY, M.P., et. al., Compatibility of Alumina-Forming Austenitic
Steels in Static and Flowing Pb. JOM 73, 4016–4022 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11837-
021-04961-y

Recommendation: none

NRC Response

The staff has deleted this section as a result of Comment 7-9.

Comment No. 5-23

Section: Page 16, “Lead Erosion”

Comment/Basis: It is recommended to reword the statement: “Lead is highly eroding, and for
this reason, the flow velocity should be limited (IRSN, 2012; Ballinger and Lim, 2003)” as neither
of the references provided gives evidence that “lead is highly eroding.”. While it is true that the
lead flow velocity must be limited to prevent erosion effects, as written the text is misleading.

Recommendation: It is suggested to reword as: “At high lead (or LBE) flow velocities the effect
of erosion, in addition to corrosion, should be considered. Even though the flow velocity limit is
not absolute but temperature- and material-dependent, common practice is to maintain the
velocity of lead-based coolants in high temperature regions of the reactor coolant system, such
as the core, below approximately 2 m/s both for LBE (Ref. A) and for pure lead coolant (Ref. B).
Higher velocities may be acceptable especially when the operating temperature is low, such as
for pump impellers located in the cold leg of the reactor coolant system where the temperature
is generally at or below 400°C.” where the references are:

Ref. A: T. R. Allen and D. C. Crawford, Lead-Cooled Fast Reactor Systems and the Fuels and
Materials Challenges. Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations, Volume 2007, Article ID
97486, doi:10.1155/2007/97486

Ref. B: Vogt, J.-B.; Proriol Serre, I. A Review of the Surface Modifications for Corrosion
Mitigation of Steels in Lead and LBE. Coatings 2021, 11, 53.
https://doi.org/10.3390/coatings11010053

NRC Response

The staff agrees and has made changes to the “Effect of Flow Velocity” section of the ISG
based on this comment. The section now reads:

       “Increasing flow velocities increase the effects of erosion and corrosion and should
       be considered (IRSN, 2012; Ballinger, and Lim, 2003). Studies have shown that
       decreasing velocity can control erosion for lead and LBE (Allen T.R. and Crawford
       D.C., 2007) and for pure lead coolant (Vogt, J.B. and Proriol Serre, I., 2021).
       Limiting flow velocities are not absolute but temperature- and material-dependent.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                            Page 18 of 26


       Higher velocities may be acceptable especially for lower operating temperatures.
       The staff should review temperature, flow velocities and dissolved oxygen to
       accurately consider the combined effects of erosion and corrosion.”

Comment No. 5-24

Section: Page 16, second to last paragraph “Liquid Metal Embrittlement”

Comment/Basis: The ISG says: “The severity of dissolution corrosion attack in Type 316L
stainless steel was found to increase with increasing percentages of cold work (Klok et al.,
2017).” This is evidence collected in LBE coolant, which is known to behave differently
than pure lead.

Recommendation: As such, it is suggested to reword the sentence by saying: “The severity of
dissolution corrosion attack in Type 316L stainless steel was found, in LBE coolant, to increase
with increasing percentages of cold work (Klok et al., 2017).

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated the comment.

Comment No. 5-25

Section: Page 16, “Nonmetallic materials”

Comment/Basis: The ISG says: “SiC/SiC has shown resistance to liquid metal corrosion up to
800 degrees C in a few short-term tests using a non-flowing lead-lithium eutectic (EPRI,
2019b)”.

Recommendation: It is recommended not to use this example/reference as it is referred to a
coolant, i.e., lead-lithium eutectic, which is not relevant for fission applications and is completely
different from the corrosion standpoint with respect to Pb and LBE. The following statement is
suggested: “SiC/SiC has shown resistance to liquid metal corrosion up to 550 degrees C in
2000 hr corrosion tests in flowing liquid LBE (Ref. A)”. where the reference is:

Ref. A: TAKAHASHI, M., KONDO, M., Corrosion resistance of ceramics SiC and Si3N4 in
flowing lead-bismuth eutectic. Progress in Nuclear Energy, Volume 53, Issue 7, September
2011, Pages 1061- 1065. http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-12-803581-8.00749-9/sbref146

NRC Response

The staff agrees the suggested language and reference are appropriate and have incorporated
the comment.

Comment No. 5-26

Section: Page 16, bottom of page under “Oxygen control”

Comment/Basis: The ISG says: “Unlike in other reactor types, accelerated corrosion can occur if
the dissolved oxygen concentration is either too high or too low at a specific temperature (EPRI,
2019b; Klok et al., 2018).” This statement is not correct since, for example, if the oxygen content
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                        Page 19 of 26


is very high and the temperature is below 450-480°C there will not be any significant corrosion
(there will be, however, precipitation of lead oxide which should not be confused with corrosion).

Recommendation: In light of this, it is suggested to replace that statement with the following:
“Oxygen control is an important technique to ensure satisfactory performance of structural
materials in lead- and LBE-cooled reactors. This technique, widely used in lead-based test
facilities worldwide (Ref. A), consists of maintaining the oxygen concentration in the coolant
within technical specifications, which are generally represented by a minimum required
concentration (needed to form a stable passivating oxide layer protecting the underlying bulk
material) and a maximum allowed concentration (above which precipitation of lead oxide would
occur thus causing plugging concerns for narrow flow passages). The width of this permissible
oxygen concentration window is a function of the reactor’s operating temperatures (both cold
and hot leg temperatures), with the lower end of this window (i.e., minimum required
concentration) dependent on the corrosion protection technique leveraged by the class of
materials used in the reactor coolant system. For example, adoption of conventional steels such
as 316H would rely on the formation of a passivating iron oxide layer which requires a minimum
oxygen concentration of approximately 10-8 wt% at 500°C. Relaxation of this limit, thus
permitting lower oxygen concentrations thus easing requirements on the oxygen control system,
can be achieved by adopting protective coatings/layers either artificially deposited on (or
superficially diffused into) the components before they enter service, e.g., aluminization through
pack cementation or Al2O3 deposition through Pulsed Laser Deposition, or self-
forming/regenerating on the surface of certain materials, e.g., Alumina-Forming Austenitic steels
(Ref. B)” where the references are:

Ref. A: M. Tarantino, et al., Overview on Lead-Cooled Fast Reactor Design and Related
Technologies Development in ENEA. Energies 2021, 14, 5157.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en141651

Ref. B: S. BASSINI et al., “Material Performance in Lead,” in Comprehensive Nuclear Materials,
Vol. 4, 2nd ed., L.- B. ALLOY, R. J. M. KONINGS, and E. STOLLER ROGER, Eds. pp. 218–
241, Elsevier, Oxford (2020).

NRC Response

The staff agrees that the section as originally written could be confusing and has incorporated
the comment, in part, to clarify the intent. The ISG now states:

       “Oxygen control is an important technique to ensure satisfactory performance of
       structural materials in lead- and LBE-cooled reactors. This technique, widely used
       in lead-based test facilities worldwide (Tarantino M., et al., 2021), consists of
       maintaining the oxygen concentration in the coolant within controlled limits.”

Comment No. 5-27

Section: Advanced Manufacturing Technologies

Comment/Basis: The staff should evaluate whether an application containing AMT components
considers (1) the differences between the AMT and traditional manufacturing methods; (2) the
safety significance of the identified differences; (3) the aspects of each AMT that are not
currently addressed by codes and standards or regulations; and (4) the impacts of the
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                         Page 20 of 26


proposed reactor type, operating conditions, and material on the AMT qualification and
performance. The staff should confirm that applicants also consider appropriate mitigation
strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance programs to ensure that SSCs fabricated
by AMTs continue to satisfy the design criteria.

Recommendation: The guidance should be updated to remove the study of differences
between AMT and traditional technologies. Technology is not less safe because it is “newer.”
Likewise, safety is not affected by technology being “different.” Advanced manufacturing
Technologies should be evaluated on their own merits and the products of those technological
methods. This is most likely what was meant, but clarification is needed.

NRC Response

No changes were made to the ISG based on this comment. While the staff agrees that
technology is not inherently less safe because it is newer or that safety is always affected by
using a different technology, the staff finds reviewing the differences between traditional
manufacturing technologies to be the most effective and expeditious method of reviewing
applications.

Letter 6— Anonymous

Comment No. 6-1

In light of the paperwork reduction Act I have prepared these artifacts; namely, to make an
example of these criminals who generally place the protection of consumers at risk. </p> State
Farm casualty is aoxymoron business…-oxymoron, mostly because they are an automobile
insurance company trying to commit crimes in the financial space (not their area of
specialization), which is supposed to defraud automobile owners, now also they are defrauding
real property taxes and the SEC?? So I also have other questions, like why haven’t they been
charged for gross negligence of property taxes, the Sarbanes-Oxley Rules…like put their
shareholders at risk to hide the Zucker Ponzi scheme?
</p></p>It’s the unit dummy, 144 of them valued at what? $20 million in soho??? Good luck
with that liability.

NRC Response

The staff made no changes to the ISG based on this comment as it is outside the scope of the
ISG.

Letter 7— EPRI

Comment No. 7-1

Page 5/Page 7: Under “General Degradation Mechanisms”, degradation mechanisms such as
“Corrosion”, “Creep and Creep-Fatigue”, “Environmentally Assisted Cracking”, “Flow Induced
Degradation (e.g., Abrasion, Erosion, Cavitation)”, “Flow-Induced Vibration”, “Irradiation”,
“Stress Relaxation Cracking” etc. are listed. In the same section, “Gaskets and Seals” is also
listed. This sub section is very component specific, rather than a degradation mechanism.

Propose moving the "Gaskets and Seals" discussion to the "General Materials Issues" section.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                         Page 21 of 26


NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated this comment.

Comment No. 7-2

Page 6: Editorial suggestion: Below are degradation mechanisms that are likely to apply across
different reactor designs, operating environments, and materials. The degradation mechanisms
identified reflect the current state of knowledge. As additional operating experience and
laboratory testing become available, the way in which each identified degradation mechanism
should be addressed may change. This includes the potential for new degradation mechanisms
to be identified. In the meantime, staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately
addressed the following general degradation mechanisms for various reactor environments.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated this comment, with minor editorial change, “The
degradation mechanisms identified reflect the current state of knowledge. As additional
operating experience and laboratory testing become available, the way in which each identified
degradation mechanism should be addressed may change and new degradation mechanisms
may be identified.”

Comment No. 7-3

Page 7: As of 2022, ASTM E351 [sic. E531] has been withdrawn.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment and has removed the reference to ASTM D531.

Comment No. 7-4

Page 8: “For example, graphite irradiation strength will increase gradually up to turnaround dose
and then will rapidly decrease in strength after turnaround.”

In this sentence, “graphite irradiation strength” could be reworded as “strength of irradiated
graphite”: “For example, strength of irradiated graphite will increase gradually up to turnaround
dose and then will rapidly decrease after turnaround.”

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated this comment.

Comment No. 7-5

Page 9: Editorial suggestion: Below are materials topics that are likely to apply to different
reactor designs, coolants, and materials. The issues identified reflect the current state of
knowledge. As additional operating experience and laboratory testing become available, the
way in which each identified issue should be addressed may change. This includes the potential
for new issues to be identified. The staff should evaluate whether applicants have adequately
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 22 of 26


addressed the following design neutral materials issues as appropriate for the application and
design.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated this comment.

Comment No. 7-6

Page 11: Carburization/decarburization can be an environmental degradation issue for molten
salt, Na, and gas-cooled reactors. However, it is only discussed directly in the context of gas-
cooled reactors under "He impurities". It is not discussed directly here, for molten salt reactors,
but it would be useful to do so.

NRC Response

The staff agrees that Carburization should be considered for all reactor types and has added a
Carburization section under General Degradation Mechanisms in addition to a section in each
design specific Appendix.

Comment No. 7-7

Page 11: Cladding is only mentioned in “Liquid Metal Reactors” Section as fuel cladding.
However, Liquid fuel MSR presents unique challenges for materials selection based on the
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code (BPVC)
Section III, Division 5, for use in high-temperature nuclear reactors, because of the high Cr
content of code-qualified alloys. In particular MSR concepts, it might be necessary to improve
corrosion resistance of already codified alloys to limit wall thinning and eventual loss of
structural strength. It could be beneficial to include surface treatments being considered for
alloys with less-than-optimal molten salt corrosion resistance, which include weld overlay
cladding, electroplating, chemical and physical vapor deposition, hot isostatic pressing, and etc.
Good corrosion performance of cladding can be degraded significantly by relatively small
alloying additions of other metals. In addition, high temperature microstructural evolution of
the coating and the cladding/alloy interface such as changes in grain structure and formation of
second phase particles could affect the performance of the cladding. Effective thickness of the
cladding is critical since Cr can diffuse through the cladding in MSRs, which could result in
formation of voids in the alloy in addition to the Cr loss to the molten salt. Generally, corrosion
resistance and mechanical properties under periods of sustained and cyclic loading at high
temperatures is needed to assess long-term corrosion protection of cladding. In addition,
radiation damage resistance and weldability of the cladding need to be studied.

NRC Response

The staff agrees that cladding could be considered in several reactor designs and has added a
section on cladding in the ISG section “Metallic Materials Qualification.”

Comment No. 7-8

Page 13: Carburization/decarburization can be an environmental degradation issue for molten
salt, Na, and gas-cooled reactors. However, it is only discussed directly in the context of gas-
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 23 of 26


cooled reactors under "He impurities". It is not discussed directly here, for Na reactors, but it
would be useful to do so.

NRC Response

The staff agrees that Carburization should be considered for Na reactors and have added a
section on sodium impurities in the ISG.

Comment No. 7-9

Page 15: “Non-code-qualified materials such as alumina forming or aluminum-coated stainless
steels and silicon-enriched stainless steels may provide enhanced corrosion resistance in LBE
and lead coolants at high temperatures (EPRI,2019b; OECD, 2007; Ballinger and Lim, 2003).
The staff should verify that appropriate materials qualification and surveillance programs are
in place for any non-code-qualified materials used in lead- or LBE-cooled reactors.”

   (1) Does this statement concerning the use of non-code qualified material apply more
       broadly than just to lead- or LBE-cooled reactors?
   (2) One assumes that there is a minimum level of "qualification" in order to activate this
       approach. Therefore, can "appropriate qualification" be clarified?

NRC Response

The staff have removed this section of the ISG. See response to Comment 7-10.

Comment No. 7-10

Page 15: General comment pertaining to the use of "non-code-qualified materials"

This seems inconsistent with the rest of the document, e.g.:

Page 1: “The guidance in this document identifies areas of staff review that could be necessary
for a submittal seeking to use materials allowed under American Society of Mechanical
Engineers (ASME) Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code (ASME Code), Section III, “Rules for the
Construction of Nuclear Facility Components,” Division 5, “High Temperature Reactors” (Section
III-5) (ASME, 2017).”

Page 19: IMPLEMENTATION. This section references that this ISG will be used to review non-
LWR applications that propose to use materials allowed under ASME Section III, Division 5.

It is proposed that the statement concerning the use of "non-code-qualified materials" be
located in a section applicable to all reactor designs, not solely under the verbiage on page 15.

NRC Response

The staff removed the cited paragraph and has added generic guidance on non-code qualified
materials in the Applicability section of the ISG.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 24 of 26


Comment No. 7-11

Page 19: “The staff should evaluate whether there is a favorable environment that leads to a
stable oxide film and stable internal carbides (INL, 2006) and avoids excessive carburization,
surface carburization, and decarburization. Other environmental factors to evaluate are
the effects of temperature, alloy composition, and other impurities such as H2O (NRC, 2021c).”

Perhaps use another impurity as an example, as H2O was discussed in the previous paragraph.

NRC Response

The staff agrees that the example of H2O was an unnecessary duplication and made the
following modification to the ISG: “Other environmental factors to evaluate are the effects of
temperature, alloy composition, and other coolant impurities.”

Comment No. 7-12

Page 19: The reference for Figure 7 should be NRC 2021c, not NRC 2021a.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with and has incorporated this comment.

Comment No. 7-13

Page 19: Propose statement under “Metallic Materials Qualification” be moved under the
"General Materials Issues" section, as the qualification of metallic materials will be pertinent for
designs beyond HTGRs.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment that qualification of metallic materials will be pertinent for
designs beyond HTRGs and moved the section to the General Materials Issues section of the
ISG.

Letter 8 — INL

Comment No. 8-1

We strongly support the emphasis on performance monitoring and surveillance
specimens/testing to address materials degradations during reactor operations.
We note that the need for performance monitoring and surveillance programs, particularly for
very long design lifetimes, e.g., 500,000 hours, has been reinforced in Division 5 recently. A
General Note has been added to Table HBB-I-14.10E-1 on the stress rupture factors for 9Cr-
1Mo-V weldment in the 2023 edition of Division 5 which states:
       The values in this table are extrapolated from shorter term test data using an
       engineering model. For longer design lives, the designer should consider further strength
       reductions to account for potential in-service material degradation, per HBB-2160(a). In
       addition, enhanced material surveillance programs and/or heightened in-service
       inspection per the rules of ASME Section XI may be warranted.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                        Page 25 of 26


NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment but found no edits were needed to the ISG based on this
comment.

Comment No. 8-2

Since some Advanced Non-Light Water Reactors (ANLWRs) may be used in whole or in part for
the generation of nuclear process heat that will be used in an associated facility (e.g., hydrogen
generation, ammonia production, petrochemical refining, etc.), it will be very important to
provide guidance as to where the nuclear island stops and the non-nuclear facility begins with
regard to safety standards and design margins for the structures, systems, and components
(SSCs). This is particularly important for secondary or tertiary heat transfer loops. Also, the
potential for adverse feedback between the nuclear and non-nuclear portions of a site--going
either way--must be considered.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment; however, it is out of scope of the ISG, and no changes were
made to the ISG based on this comment.

Comment No. 8-3

How will the safety significance and potential consequences of SSC malfunctions or failures be
assessed to set required margins and assess design adequacy? Considering that one goal of
ANLWRs is to produce power more economically, vendors will likely consider the use of
reduced margins or commercial design codes where possible/appropriate. Augmented staff
guidance to evaluate the adequacy of these approaches should be provided.

NRC Response

The staff made no changes based on this comment as it is outside the scope of the ISG.

Comment No. 8-4

It is agreed that appropriate mitigation strategies, performance monitoring, and surveillance
programs should be considered to address the effects of thermal aging on design properties
(ISG p8). Though, it is noted that thermal aging effects on yield and ultimate strength are
specifically addressed in Division 5 and mandatory factors are provided.

NRC Response

The staff agrees with this comment and determined no changes were necessary to be made to
the ISG.

Comment No. 8-5

While components fabricated with advanced manufacturing technology (AMT) are addressed in
the ISG (pp 9-10), there does not appear to be guidance regarding assuring that their high
temperature properties are adequately defined. While this is an emerging field, limited studies
have shown that while some AMT materials may have comparable room temperature or even
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix A                                                           Page 26 of 26


short-term elevated temperature properties, long-term creep, fatigue, and creep-fatigue
properties may be significantly reduced from wrought material values. Highlighting this issue
and providing guidance or references related to it would be valuable. The ASME Section III
Task Group on Division 5 AM Components would be a good source for up-to-date information
on this subject.

NRC Response

The staff agrees that staff should consider potential performance differences of AMT fabricated
components operated at high temperatures and has incorporated the comment under General
Materials Issues section “Advanced Manufacturing Technologies”. The section now includes this
statement, “It is particularly important that an application fully addresses AMT material
performance at high temperatures. Limited studies have shown long-term creep, fatigue, and
creep-fatigue properties may be reduced compared to wrought material values”.

Comment No. 8-6

While wear and fretting are mentioned in the ISG (pg. 9), it is important to note that tribology is
significantly affected by particular coolants. Limited results have shown issues related to self-
welding of SSCs in helium coolants. The virtual elimination of external oxide layers on metallic
components in fluoride salt coolants practically ensures different tribological behavior in such
media. Staff need to be given guidance to assess tribology in specific reactor environments.

NRC Response

The staff agrees that tribology is an important consideration and incorporated this statement into
“Coolant Flow, wear and fretting” in the ISG. The section now includes this statement “Reactor
operation may be affected by tribological effects such as friction, wear and fretting”.

Comment No. 8-7

Guidance on ensuring that irradiation effects are adequately addressed for ANLWRs is
described in multiple places in the ISG. However, given that the high doses likely to be reached
in some fast reactor components can significantly exceed the existing data base on irradiation
effects, it could be valuable to provide additional guidance regarding the potential value and
limitations for using high-dose, ion-beam irradiations to further assess property changes at
these high doses. The recent work funded as part of DOE's Integrated Research Program and
lead by the University of Michigan on high-dose ion-irradiation effects probably provides the
most comprehensive information on this subject currently available.

NRC Response

The staff acknowledges the work done under the DOE Integrated Research Program and the
University of Michigan. However, the staff has not evaluated whether the use of ion-beam
irradiation as a substitute for neutron irradiation effects on different structural materials is
acceptable. Therefore, no changes were made to this ISG.
                  DANU-ISG-2023-01 APPENDIX B

                            References

10 CFR Part 50    U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, “Domestic Licensing of
                  Production and Utilization Facilities,” Part 50, Chapter I,
                  Title 10, “Energy.”

10 CFR Part 52    U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, “Licenses, Certifications,
                  and Approvals for Nuclear Power Plants,” Part 52, Chapter I,
                  Title 10, “Energy.”

Alemberti, 2014   Alemberti A., Smirnov V., Smith C.F., Takahashi M., "Overview
                  of Lead-Cooled Fast Reactor Activities," Progress in Nuclear
                  Energy, 77:300-307, 2014.

Allen, T.R. and   Allen, T.R. and Crawford, D.C., "Lead-Cooled Fast Reactor
Crawford D.C.     the Fuels and Materials Challenges. Science and Technology
                  of Nuclear Installations," 2007.

ANL, 2017         Argonne National laboratory, “Understanding and Predicting
                  Effect of Sodium Exposure on Microstructure of Grade 91
                  Steel,” ANL-ART-107, Lemont, IL, 2017.

API, 2017         American Petroleum Institute, API Technical Report 942-B,
                  “Material, Fabrication, and Repair Considerations for
                  Austenitic Alloys Subject to Embrittlement and Cracking in
                  High Temperature 565 °C to 760 °C (1050 °F to 1400 °F)
                  Refinery Services,” 1st Edition, Washington, DC, May 2017.

Argonne, 1978     EBR-II Project: "EBR-II Operating Experience," Argonne
                  National Laboratory, 1978.

ASME, 2017        American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Boiler and
                  Pressure Vessel Code, 2017 edition, Section III, Division 5,
                  “High Temperature Reactors,” New York, NY.

ASME, 2020        American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2020 edition,
                  B31.1-2020, “Power Piping,” New York, NY.

ASME, 2021        American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Boiler and
                  Pressure Vessel Code, 2021 edition, Section VIII, Division I,
                  “Division Rules for Construction Pressure Vessels,” New York,
                  NY.

ASTM, 1996        ASTM International, Standard Practice for Surveillance Testing
                  of High-Temperature Nuclear Component Materials, ASTM
                  E531- 13, West Conshohocken, PA.




                               B-1
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix B                                                           Page 2 of 8


   Ballinger and Lim, 2003      Ballinger, R.G. and J. Lim, “An Overview of Corrosion Issues
                                for the Design and Operation of High-Temperature Lead- and
                                Lead-Bismuth-Cooled Reactor Systems, Nuclear Technology,
                                147, 418–435, 2017. https://doi.org/10.13182/NT04-A3540.

   Bassini, S. et al., 2020     Bassini, S. et al., “Material Performance in Lead,” in
                                Comprehensive Nuclear Materials, Vol. 4, 2nd ed., Alloy L.B.;
                                Konings, R. J. M.; Stoller Roger, E., eds. pp. 218–241,
                                Elsevier, Oxford, 2020.

   Braun et al., 2021           Braun, J., C. Sauder, F. Rouillard, and F. Balbaud-Célérier,
                                “Mechanical Behavior of SiC/SiC Composites After Exposure
                                in High Temperature Liquid Sodium for Sodium Fast Reactors
                                Applications,” Journal of Nuclear Materials, 546:152743, 2021.

   Briggs, R.B., 1969           Briggs, R.B., “Assessment of Service Life of MSRE,” ORNL-
                                CF-69-8-3, August 5, 1969.

   Chen, L., et al.,            Chen, L., et al., “Investigation of Microstructure and Liquid
                                Lead Corrosion Behavior of a Fe-18Ni-16Cr-4Al Base
                                Alumina-Forming Austenitic Stainless Steel.” Mater. Res.
                                Express 7:2, 026533, 2020.


   Choi, H., et al., 2021       Choi, H., et al., “The Fast Modular Reactor (FMR) -
                                Development Plan of a New 50 MWe Gas-cooled Fast
                                Reactor,” Transactions of the American Society ANS, 124:454-
                                456, 2021.

   Colwell and Shargay, 2020    Colwell, R. and C. Shargay, “Alloy 800H: Material and
                                Fabrication Challenges Associated with the Mitigation of
                                Stress Relaxation Cracking,” PVP2020-21842, V006T06A069,
                                Proceedings of the Pressure Vessels, and Piping Conference,
                                Volume 6: Materials and Fabrication, Virtual, Online, August 3,
                                2020.

   Corwin et al., 2008          Corwin, W.R., et al., “Generation IV Reactors Integrated
                                Materials Technology Program Plan: Focus on Very High
                                Temperature Reactor Materials,” ORNL/TM-2008/129, Oak
                                Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN.

   Domstedt, P., et al., 2019   Domstedt, P., Lundberg, M., Szakalos, P., “Corrosion Studies
                                of Low-Alloyed FeCrAl Steels in Liquid Lead at 750 °C.”
                                Oxidation of Metals, 91:511–524, 2019.

   Domstedt, P., et al., 2020   Domstedt, P., Et al. Corrosion studies of a low alloyed Fe–
                                10Cr–4Al steel exposed in liquid Pb at very high temperatures.
                                Journal of Nuclear Materials. 531. 152022, 2020.

   EPRI, 2019a                  Electric Power Research Institute, “Program on Technology
                                Innovation: Material Property Assessment and Data Gap
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix B                                                          Page 3 of 8


                                 Analysis for the Prospective Materials for Molten Salt
                                 Reactors,” Technical Report 3002010726, March 2019.

   EPRI, 2019b                   Electric Power Research Institute, “Program on Technology
                                 Innovation: Materials Properties Assessment and Gap
                                 Analysis for Lead-Cooled Fast Reactors a Survey of Available
                                 Materials Data,” Technical Report 3002016950, Palo, Alto, CA,
                                 October 2019.
   EPRI, 2020a                   Electric Power Research Institute, “Program on Technology
                                 Innovation: Material Property Assessment and Data Gap
                                 Analysis for the Prospective Materials for Very High
                                 Temperature Reactors (VHTRs) and Gas-Cooled Fast
                                 Reactors (GFRs),” Technical Report 3002015815, Palo Alto,
                                 CA, October 2020.

   EPRI, 2020b                   Electric Power Research Institute, “Program on Technology
                                 Innovation: Material Property Assessment and Data Analysis
                                 for Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactors,” Technical Report
                                 3002016949, Palo Alto, CA, October 2020.

   García Ferré, F. et al., 2017 García Ferré, F., et al., “Corrosion and Radiation Resistant
                                 Nanoceramic Coatings for Lead Fast Reactors,” Corrosion
                                 Science, 124, 80-92, 2017.

   Gorse et al., 2011            Gorse, D., et al., “Influence of Liquid Lead and Lead-Bismuth
                                 Eutectic on Tensile, Fatigue and Creep Properties of
                                 Ferritic/Martensitic and Austenitic Steels for Transmutation
                                 Systems,” Journal of Nuclear Materials, 415:284 – 292, 2011.

   Guidez, J. and Prèle, G., 2017   Guidez, J., and Prèle, G., “Superphénix—Technical and
                                    Scientific Achievements,” Atlantis Press, Paris, France,
                                    2017.

   Hemery et. al., 2013          Hemery, S., Auger, T., Courouau, J. L., Balbaud-Celerier, F.,
                                 “Effect of Oxygen on Liquid Sodium Embrittlement of T91
                                 Martensitic Steel”, Corrosion Science, 76:441 – 452, 2013.

   Ignativ, et al., 2013         Ignatiev, V., Surenkov A., Gnidoy I., Kulakov A., Uglov V.,
                                 Vasiliev A., Presniakov M., “Intergranular Tellurium Cracking
                                 of Nickel-based Alloys in Molten Li, Be, Th, U/F Salt Mixture,”
                                 Journal of Nuclear Materials, 440:243 – 249, 2013.

   INL, 2006                     Idaho National Laboratory, “Kinetics of Gas Reactions and
                                 Environmental Degradation in NGNP Helium,” INL/EXT-06-
                                 11494, Idaho Falls, ID, June 2006.

   INL, 2011                     Idaho National Laboratory, “High Temperature Gas-Cooled
                                 Reactors Lessons Learned Applicable to the Next Generation
                                 Nuclear Plant,” Idaho Falls, ID, April 2011.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix B                                                      Page 4 of 8


   INL, 2020                  Idaho National Laboratory, “The Elevated-Temperature Cyclic
                              Properties of Alloy 316L Manufactured Using Power
                              Metallurgy Hot Isostatic Pressing,” INL/EXT-20-59329,
                              September 2020

   INL, 2021                  Idaho National Laboratory, “The Elevated-Temperature Cyclic
                              Properties of Alloy 316H Fabricated by Power Metallurgy Hot
                              Isostatic Pressing,” INL/EXT-21-62993, June 2021

   IRSN, 2012                 Institut de Radioprotection et de Sûreté Nucléaire, “Overview
                              of Generation IV (Gen IV) Reactor Designs//Safety and
                              Radiological Protection Considerations,” September 24, 2012.
                              https://www.irsn.fr/EN/Research/publications-
                              documentation/Scientific-
                              books/Documents/GENIV_texte_VA_241012a.pdf.

   Jones, 1992                Jones, R.H., “Stress-Corrosion Cracking,” ASM International,
                              Materials Park, OH, 1992.

   Kim et al., 2013           Kim, W., G. Lee, J. Park, S. Hong, and Y. Kim, “Creep and
                              Oxidation Behaviors of Alloy 617 in Air and Helium
                              Environments at 1173 K,” 6th International Conference on
                              Creep, Fatigue and Creep-Fatigue Interaction (CF-6),
                              Pyongchang, 25-26 Oct 2007.

   Klok et al., 2017          Klok, O., K. Lambrinou, S. Gavrilov, E. Stergar, T. Van der
                              Donck, S. Huang, B. Tunca, and I. De Graeve, “Influence of
                              Plastic Deformation on Dissolution Corrosion of Type 316L
                              Austenitic Stainless Steel in Static, Oxygen-Poor Liquid Lead-
                              Bismuth Eutectic at 500°C,” Corrosion, 1 September 2017, 73:
                              1078 – 1090. https://doi.org/10.5006/2400.

   Klok et al., 2018          Klok, O., K. Lambrinou, S. Gavrilov, J. Lim, and I. De Graeve,
                              (May 16, 2018), “Effect of Lead-Bismuth Eutectic Oxygen
                              Concentration on the Onset of Dissolution Corrosion in 316 L
                              Austenitic Stainless Steel at 450 °C,” ASME Journal of Nuclear
                              Radiation Science, 4:031019-3 – 7, 2018.
                              https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4039598.

   Miller, 1998               Miller, D.A., “Review of reheat cracking in British Energy’s
                              AGRs [Advanced Gas Reactors] in the safety case strategy to
                              address this threat,” IMechE C535/022/98, 117–126, 1998.
   NEA-OECD, 2015             NEA-OECD, Handbook on Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy and
                              Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics
                              and Technologies, 2015 edition.

   NRC, 2002                  U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Request for Additional
                              Information (RAI) on High Temperature Materials Graphite;
                              Control of Chemical Attack; and Design Codes and Standards
                              for the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor (PBMR),” letter from
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix B                                                     Page 5 of 8


                              F. Eltiwala to K. Borton, Exelon Generation, May 31, 2002,
                              ADAMS Accession No. ML021510521.

   NRC, 2003                  U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Materials Behavior in
                              HTGR Environments,” NUREG/CR-6824, Washington, DC,
                              July 2003, Agencywide Documents Access and Management
                              System (ADAMS) Accession No. ML032370015.

   NRC, 2018                  U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Guidance for
                              Developing Principal Design Criteria for Non-Light Water
                              Reactors,” ADAMS Accession No. ML18081A306.

   NRC, 2019                  U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Advanced
                              Non-Light-Water Reactors Materials and Operational
                              Experience,” TLR-RES/DE/CIB-2019-01, Washington, DC,
                              March 2019, ADAMS Accession No. ML18353B121.

   NRC, 2021a                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Draft Advanced
                              Manufacturing Technologies Review Guidelines,” Washington,
                              DC, July 2021, ADAMS Accession No. ML21074A037.

   NRC, 2021b                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Draft Guidelines
                              Document for Additive Retail Manufacturing – Laser Powder
                              Bed Fusion,” Washington, DC, July 2021, ADAMS Accession
                              No. ML21074A040.

   NRC, 2021c                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, TLR-RE/DE/CIB-CMB-
                              2021-04, “Corrosion in Gas-Cooled Reactors,” Washington,
                              DC, March 2021, ADAMS Accession No. ML21084A041.

   NRC, 2021d                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Technical Assessment
                              of Materials Compatibility in Molten Salt Reactors,”
                              TLR-RES/DE/CIB-2021-03, Washington, DC, March 2021,
                              ADAMS Accession No. ML21084A039.

   NRC, 2021e                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Corrosion and Sodium
                              Fast Reactors,” TLR-RES/DE/CIB-CMB-2021-07, Washington,
                              DC, May 2021, ADAMS Accession No. ML21116A231.

   NRC, 2021f                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Assessment of
                              Graphite Properties and Degradation Including Source
                              Dependence,” TLR-RES/DE/REB-2021-08, Washington, DC,
                              August 2021, ADAMS Accession Nos. ML21215A347 and
                              ML21215A346.

   NRC, 2022a                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Review of Code Cases
                              Permitting Use of Nickel-Based Alloy 617 in Conjunction with
                              ASME Section III, Division 5,” TLR-RES/DE/REB-2022-01,
                              Washington, DC, January 31, 2022, ADAMS Accession No.
                              ML22031A137.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix B                                                       Page 6 of 8


   NRC, 2022b                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Acceptability of ASME
                              Code, Section XI, Division 2, ‘Requirements for Reliability and
                              Integrity Management (RIM) Programs for Nuclear Power
                              Plants,’ for Non-Light Water Reactors,” Regulatory
                              Guide 1.246, Washington, DC, October 2022, ADAMS
                              Accession No. ML22061A244.

   NRC, 2023a                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Acceptability of ASME
                              Section III, Division 5, ‘High Temperature Reactors,’”
                              Revision 2 to Regulatory Guide 1.87, Washington, DC,
                              January 2023, ADAMS Accession No. ML22101A263.

   NRC, 2023b                 U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, “Technical Review of
                              the 2017 Edition of ASME Code, Section III, Division 5,
                              “High Temperature Reactors.’” NUREG-2245, Washington,
                              DC, January 2023, ADAMS Accession No. ML23030B636.

   OECD, 2007                 Organization for Economic Co-Operation, and Development,
                              “Handbook on Lead-bismuth eutectic Alloy and Lead
                              Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics and
                              Technologies,” Nuclear Energy Agency, ISBN 978-92-64-
                              99002-9, No. 6195, Paris, France, 2007.

   Olander, 2002              Olander, D., “Redox condition in molten fluoride salts:
                              Definition and control,” Journal of Nuclear Materials, 300:270 –
                              272, February 2002.

   ORNL, 1970                 Haubenreich, P. N., “Fluorine Production and Recombination
                              in Frozen MSR Salts After Reactor Operation,” ORNL-TM-
                              3144, Oak Ridge, TN, September 1970.

   ORNL, 1977                 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, “Status of Tellurium-Hastelloy
                              N Studies in Molten Fluoride Salts,” ORNL/TM-6002, Oak
                              Ridge, TN, October 1977.

   ORNL, 1978                 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, “Status of Materials
                              Development for Molten Salt Reactors,” ORNL/TM-5920, Oak
                              Ridge, TN, January 1978.

   ORNL, 1995                 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, "Radiation Damage in
                              Carbon-Carbon Composites: Structure and Property Effects,"
                              International Workshop on Carbon Materials, Sep 19, 1995,
                              Stockholm, Sweden.

   ORNL, 2018                 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, "Handbook of LWR SiC/SiC
                              Cladding Properties - Revision 1," ORNL/TM-2018/912,
                              August 2018.

   ORNL, 2021                 Raiman, S.S., Muralidharan, G., Mayes, R.T., Kurley, J.M.,
                              "Compatibility Studies of Cladding Candidates and Advanced
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix B                                                        Page 7 of 8


                                Low-Cr Superalloys in Molten NaCl-MgCl2," ORNL/TM-
                                2019/1132, April 2019.

   Pint, B.A., et al., 2021     Pint, B.A., Su, Y.F., Brady, M.P., et. al., “Compatibility of
                                Alumina-Forming Austenitic Steels in Static and Flowing Pb.”
                                JOM 73, 4016–4022, 2021.

   Proctor, 2021                Proctor, D., “Nuclear First—Work Starts on Russian Fast
                                Neutron Reactor,” Power Magazine, June 8, 2021.

   Sauvage, 1979                Sauvage, J.F., “Phénix—30 Years of History: The Heart of the
                                Reactor,” Electricité de France report, Commissariat à
                                l’Energie Atomique, France, 1979, available at
                                http://fissilematerials.org/library/sau04.pdf.

   Qiu et al., 2020             Qiu, J., A. Wu, Y. Li, Y. Xu, R. Scarlat, and D. Macdonald,
                                “Galvanic corrosion of Type 316L Stainless Steel and Graphite
                                in Molten Fluoride Salt,” Corrosion Science, 170:108677,
                                2020.

   Snead et al., 2007           Snead L.L., Nozawa T., Katoh Y., Byun T.S., Kondo S., Petti
                                D.A., "Handbook of SiC Properties for Fuel Performance
                                Modeling," Journal of Nuclear Materials, 371:329 – 377, 2007.


   Sridharan, 2019              Sridharan, K., “Corrosion Effects in Materials in High-
                                Temperature Gas-Cooled Reactor (HTGR) Environments,”
                                presentation at the Advanced Non-Light Water Reactors,
                                Materials and Component Integrity Workshop, U.S. Nuclear
                                Regulatory Commission, Rockville, MD, December 9-11, 2019,
                                in Regulatory Information Letter RIL 2020-09, “International
                                Workshop on Advanced Nonlight-Water Reactor—Materials
                                and Component Integrity,” September 2020, ADAMS
                                Accession No. ML20245E186.

   Shoemaker et al., 2007       Shoemaker, L.E., G.D. Smith, B.A. Baker, and J.M. Poole,
                                “Fabricating Nickel Alloys to Avoid Relaxation Cracking,”
                                Paper No. 07421, Proceedings of CORROSION 2007,
                                Nashville, Tennessee, March 11, 2007, NACE International.

   Takahashi, M. and            Takahashi, M., Kondo, M., “Corrosion Resistance of Ceramics
   SiC Kondo, M., 2011          And Si3N4 in Flowing Lead-Bismuth Eutectic.” Progress in
                                Nuclear Energy, Volume 53, Issue 7, Pages 1061- 1065,
                                September 2011.

   Tarantino M., et al., 2021   Tarantino M., et al., 2021, “Overview on Lead-Cooled Fast
                                Reactor Design and Related Technologies Development in
                                ENEA.” Energies 2021, 14, 5157.
DANU-ISG-2023-01 Appendix B                                                       Page 8 of 8


   Thorley and Tyzack, 1967   Thorley, A.W. and C. Tyzack, “Corrosion Behaviour of Steels
                              and Nickel Alloys in High-Temperature Sodium,” IAEA:
                              International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 1967.


   van Wortel, 2007           van Wortel, H., “Control of Relaxation Cracking in Austenitic
                              High Temperature Components,” Paper No. 07423,
                              Proceedings of CORROSION 2007, Nashville, Tennessee,
                              March 11, 2007, NACE International.

   Vogt, J. B. and            Vogt, J. B. and Proriol Serre, I., “A Review of the Surface
   Proriol Serre, I., 2021    Modifications for Corrosion Mitigation of Steels in Lead and
                              LBE.” Coatings 2021, 11, 53.

   Zheng, Y., et al. 2021     Zheng, Y., Rahman, M.S., Polycarpou, A.A., "Self-Welding of
                              Inconel 617 Under High-Pressure-High-Temperature
                              Conditions for Nuclear Reactors," Nuclear Engineering and
                              Design, 371:110941, 2021.
