IAEA-TECDOC-1180




         Unusual occurrences during
                    LMFR operation
                   Proceedings of a Technical Committee meeting
                            held in Vienna, 9-13 November 1998




     INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY


                                                   October 2000
The IAEA does not normally maintain stocks of reports in this series They are however
collected by the International Nuclear Information System (INIS) as non-conventional literature
Should a document be out of print, a copy on microfiche or in electronic format can be
purchased from the INIS Document Delivery Services

      INIS Clearinghouse
      International Atomic Energy Agency
      Wagramer Strasse 5
      P O Box 100
      A-1400 Vienna, Austria

      Telephone (43) 1 2600 22880 or 22866
      Fax (43) 1 2600 29882
      E-mail chouse@iaea orq

Orders should be accompanied by prepayment of 100 Austrian Schillings in the form of a
cheque or credit card (VISA, Mastercard)

More information on the INIS Document Delivery Services and a list of national document
delivery services where these reports can also be ordered can be found on the INIS Web site at
http //www laea orq/mis/dd srv htm
           PLEASE BE AWARE THAT
ALL OF THE MISSING PAGES IN THIS DOCUMENT
          WERE ORIGINALLY BLANK
 The originating Section of this publication in the IAEA was:
   Nuclear Power Technology and Development Section
           International Atomic Energy Agency
                   Wagramer Strasse 5
                       P.O. Box 100
                 A-1400 Vienna, Austria




UNUSUAL OCCURENCES DURING LMFR OPERATION
            IAEA, VIENNA, 2000
            IAEA-TECDOC-1180
              ISSN 1011^289
                        © IAEA, 2000
                Printed by the IAEA in Austria
                        October 2000
                                       FOREWORD

      Design of liquid metal cooled fast reactors (LMFRs) is still in evolution, and only a
small number of LMFRs are in operation around the world. Specialists operating these
LMFRs have gained valuable experience from incidents, failures, and other events that took
place in the reactors. These unusual occurrences, lessons learned and measures to prevent
recurrences are often either not reported in literature, or reported only briefly and without
sufficient detail. Hence there is a need for specialists designing and operating LMFRs to
share their knowledge on unusual occurrences.
      Considerable experimental and theoretical knowledge on various aspects of LMFR
design construction, pre-operation testing and operation has been collected by several
Member States with fast reactor programmes over the past decades.
      Recently, more countries have launched their programmes on fast reactors in critical and
subcritical (driven by a spallation neutron source) mode cooled by liquid metal.
      The needs in generalisation, review and documentation of fundamental knowledge in
liquid metal cooled reactor technology were a major consideration in the recommendation by
the International Working Group on Fast Reactors (IWGFR) for the IAEA to convene this
Technical Committee meeting on the subject of unusual occurrences during LMFR operation
and their consequences for reactor systems.
      The IAEA officer responsible for this work was A.A. Rineiskii of the Division of
Nuclear Power.
                                      EDITORIAL NOTE

This publication has been prepared from the original material as submitted by the authors. The views
expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the IAEA, the governments of the nominating Member
States or the nominating organizations.
The use of particular designations of countries or territories does not imply any judgement by the
publisher, the IAEA, as to the legal status of such countries or territories, of their authorities and
institutions or of the delimitation of their boundaries.
The mention of names of specific companies or products (whether or not indicated as registered) does
not imply any intention to infringe proprietary rights, nor should it be construed as an endorsement or
recommendation on the part of the IAEA.
The authors are responsible for having obtained the necessary permission for the IAEA to reproduce,
translate or use material from sources already protected by copyrights.
                                                         CONTENTS

SUMMARY............................................................................................................................... 1

Problems experienced during operation of the prototype
    fast reactor, Dounreay, 1974-1994........................................................................................ 9
 A. Cruickshank, A.M. Judd
Sodium leakage experience at the prototype FBR Monju........................................................ 43
 A. Miyakawa, H. Maeda, Y. Kani, K. Ito
SPX significant events and whether it would have happened on EFR.................................... 57
 L. Rahmani, S. Dechelette, C. Bandini
Operating experience with Beloyarsk fast reactor BN600 NPP ............................................ 101
  O.M. Saraev
Fast reactor operating experience gained in Russia: Analysis of
    anomalies and abnormal operation cases........................................................................... 117
  Y.M. Ashurko, R.P. Baklushin, Y.I. Zagorulko, V.N. Ivanenko,
  V.P. Matveyev, B.A. Vasilyev
Unusual occurrences in fast breeder test reactor.................................................................... 145
  R.P. Kapoor, G. Srinivasan, T.R. Ellappan, P.V. Ramalingam, A.T. Vasudevan,
 M.A.K. fyer, S.M. Lee, S.B. Bhoje
Unusual occurrences during the whole operation of BN-350 NPP........................................ 169
 S. Andropenkov
Impact of LMFBR operating experience on PFBR design.................................................... 181
 S.B. Bhoje, S.C. Chetal, P. Chellapandi, S. Govindarajan, S.M. Lee,
 A.S.L. Kameswara Rao, R. Prabhakar, S. Ragupathy,
 B.S. Sodhi, T.R. Sundaramoorthy, G. Vaidyanathan
Safety design analyses of Korean advanced liquid metal reactor.......................................... 199
 S.D. Suk, C.K. Park
Several accidents about ERHRS of CEFR............................................................................. 219
 D. Zhang
Liquid metal fast reactor transient design.............................................................................. 229
 C. Horak, E. Purvis HI
A lifetime extension project for the Phenix reactor: Additional knowledge
   regarding the in-service behaviour of its materials and structures..................................... 241
 P. Martin, L. Jerrige, F. Forgeron, J. Devos

LIST OF PARTICIPANTS.................................................................................................... 253
                                           SUMMARY
1.       OVERVIEW AND PURPOSE

     The Technical Committee Meeting (TCM) on "Unusual Occurrences During LMFR
Operation: Review of Experience and Consequences for Reactor Systems" was held on the
recommendation of the International Working Group on Fast Reactors (IWGFR) at the IAEA
Headquarters in Vienna from 9 to 13 November 1998. Participants from nine countries
(China, France, India, Japan, Kazakhstan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, the
United Kingdom and the United States of America) were in attendance.
         The objectives of the TCM were:
-      to review design approaches and operational experience and to identify and characterise
       the main design and technical problems and relevant unusual occurrences during LMFR
       operation and the consequences for the reactor system;
-      to review findings in advanced LMFR designs with a view to avoiding unusual
       occurrences; and
-      to provide a forum for discussion and identification of pathways to take advantage of the
       opportunity for international co-operation in these activities

      The discussion was focused on those aspects of LMFR technology which are unique and
distinctive to plant design and operation.
2.      MAJOR PROBLEMS AND THEIR CAUSES

     LMFRs have been under development for more than 45 years. Twenty LMFRs have
been constructed and operated. Five prototype and near-commercial scale LMFRs [(BN-350
(Kazakshstan), Phenix (France), PFR (United Kingdom), BN-600 (Russian Federation) and
Superphenix (France)], with electrical output of between 250 and 1200MW(e), have
accumulated more than 85 reactor years of operating experience. Altogether, LMFRs have
accumulated more than 280 reactor years of operating experience. In many cases, experience
with these reactors has been extremely good. The reactors and special components have
shown remarkable performance well in excess of design expectations.
      Stable operation of the demonstration reactor BN-600 in Russia with a nominal power
output of 600MW(e) for 20 years and an average load factor of-72%, successful operation of
the prototype reactors BN-350 in Kazakshstan and Phenix in France as well as the reliable
operation of MOX fuel at high burnup (20% with an irradiation dose in excess of 160
displacement per atom (dpa) in the cladding) in PFR (UK) and Phenix, are milestone in the
implementation of LMFR technology.
     As is usual at the initial stage of development, the operation of prototype and
demonstration plants revealed the weak points of the original design and mode of operation,
causing some unusual events. The meeting participants discussed these unusual occurrences
as well as the steps taken to rectify them. In this way the benefit of the lessons learnt can be
made available to the designers and operators of reactors of similar type.
2.1.     Sodium leaks

      There is only one disadvantage inherent in the LMFR coolant, liquid-sodium, namely
that it interacts chemically with water/steam and air. Protection against sodium fires was an
important theme of the discussion at the meeting.
     There were significant sodium leaks and fires from the BN-600 primary (1000kg) and
secondary (650kg) circuits in 1993 and 1994,       respectively. In both cases the protective
systems were effective, the damage was not extensive and repairs were effected quickly.
Thermal striping was the cause of the leak in 1993 and staff error (pipeline cutting before
sodium was frozen) of the leak in 1994. None of these leaks has caused injury to personnel.
      A secondary sodium leak and fire at the Monju (Japan) plant in December 1995, caused
by a temperature sensor well broken by vibration, caused a long operational delay and
required plant modifications. The total mass of non-radioactive sodium which leaked was
~ 640± 42kg due to delay in sodium draining from the loop. There were no adverse effects for
operating personnel or the surrounding environment.
     To prevent a recurrence of the Monju secondary sodium leakage incident comprehensive
design review activities were started for the purpose of checking the safety and reliability of
the plant. As a result, several aspects requiring improvement were identified and
improvements and countermeasures were studied. The main improvements and
countermeasures are as follows:
-   to enable the operators to understand and react to incidents quickly, new sodium leakage
    detectors (TV monitors, smoke sensors) and a new surveillance system will be installed;
-   to reduce the amount of sodium leakage and damage by spilt sodium, the drain system will
    be remodelled to shorten the drain time;
-   to extinguish a sodium fire in the secondary circuit, a nitrogen gas injection system will be
    installed;
-   to limit the spread of aerosol, the secondary circuit will be divided into four smaller zones;
-   to replace the secondary circuit thermocouple wells by a new design;
-   to prepare a new design guide against flow-induced vibration.

      The event at the Monju plant caused a serious interruption to reactor operation. For this
reason there will be undoubtedly important efforts to reduce the incidence of sodium leaks
and to improve the protection against the consequences of fires.
      The number of leaks will be reduced by improvement of the design methods for sodium
systems taking account of the peculiar conditions to which the materials are subjected,
particularly high and fluctuating secondary stresses, high-cycle fatigue, and prolonged
exposure to high temperatures which can cause degradation of the properties of some
austenitic steels. Improved methods of estimating stresses and improved design codes
appropriate to thin-walled vessels and pipework are to be expected. Thermal striping has been
the cause of some sodium leaks in auxiliary circuits. Mixing devices should be provided to
ensure that sodium streams mix with temperature differences below the established safe
limits.
      Additional protection will be afforded by improved methods of non-destructive in-
service inspection to demonstrate the integrity of sodium vessels and pipework and to detect
incipient defects so that they can be repaired before they grow to cause leaks. Ultrasonic
methods for inspecting welds in austenitic steels, and transition welds between steels of
different composition, have been improved and further improvement can be expected.
Components will increasingly be designed to facilitate in-service inspection.
      In addition there will be greater acceptance of the "leak-before-break" approach to
protect against major failure and large leaks. This requires close attention to the reliable
detection of small leaks at an early stage, before they can give rise to significant fire. There
will also probably be developments in the field of protection against the effects of fires, by
means of improved segregation and protection of essential equipment and services, faster
sodium dump systems, better methods of extinguishing sodium fires, and enhanced protection
from damage by sodium smoke.
      Prevention, detection and mitigation of sodium leaks, improved resistance of nuclear
systems to fires and choice of concrete for minimisation of interactions remain important
directions for safety research. In France a new aluminous concrete which does not interact
with sodium has been proposed. The EFR (European fast reactor) anchored safety vessel
option was tested with this concrete. There is a need to continue the R&D on sodium-resistant
concrete to minimise damage to structures in the event of sodium leaks.
2.2. Steam generator significant events

      Steam generators (SGs) are generally regarded as the most critical of all sodium system
components. Design, manufacture and experimental testing should be carried out with special
case. It seems that all was done to install reliable SGs in prototype, demonstration and semi-
commercial LMFRs. Three prototype fast reactors (BN-350, Phenix and PFR) were
commissioned in the 1960s and two of them (BN-350 and PFR) had unforeseen occurrences
with SG.
     Problems in commissioning of BN-350 and PFR were almost entirely due to steam
generators leaks. The effect of these leaks on BN-350 and particularly on PFR availability was
considerable so that the highest annual load factor was only 10-20% for several years after
commissioning. Leaks in the PFR SGs were all associated with cracking of the tube-to-
tubeplate welds. These were hard and had high residual stresses because there was no post-
weld heat treatment.
      The tube-to-tubeplate weld leaks in the PFR evaporators necessitated the development
of a repair method by fitting sleeves to bypass defective welds: 3000 sleeves were installed in
each end of the 500 tubes of each of the three evaporators. The success of the method was
demonstrated by the fact that no further leaks have occurred.
     It was concluded that the type of direct tube-to-tube plate weld adopted initially at PFR,
which could not be heat-treated after manufacture, should be avoided in future reactors. The
UK specialists consider that austenitic steels are unsuitable for LMFR steam generators
because of the high risk of caustic stress corrosion damage following even small leaks.
      The initial period of BN-350 reactor plant operation was characterised by unreliable
operation of the SGs. Numerous leaks occurred in the tubes of the evaporators.
Metallographic examination of a great number of tubes showed the presence of microcracks in
the tube-to-bottom weld joints. Mechanical deformation of the tube bottoms during
manufacture by cold stamping is the most probable cause of the microcracks. Growth of the
cracks could occur under the effect of internal stresses arising during welding the bottoms to
the tubes and under cyclic thermal loads during operation. The evaporator tube bundles were
replaced with machined bottoms. No further problems were experienced with the evaporators.
      The early problems with the SG highlighted a need to improve non-destructive methods
for detecting small flaws in relatively inaccessible welds. A major programme of development
work led to major refinements, particularly in ultrasonic techniques.
    The under-sodium leak in a PFR superheater demonstrated that it is possible for a large
number of tubes to fail due to overheating in a few seconds, but as was pointed out at the
meeting such an event is unlikely to cause significant overpressurisation damage in the
secondary circuit or the intermediate heat exchanger. As to the modification of the PFR
sodium-water protection system and replacement of the tube bundle, the incident led to a
reassessment of the design-basis accident for the steam generators of both PFR and EFR. In
the case of PFR the design basis accident was changed from a single double-ended guillotine
rupture to 40 double-ended guillotine raptures spread over a period of 10 s.
      As stated above, in the early years of the development of fast reactors there was a high
incidence of leaks in the steam generators. Since leaks in sodium-heated steam generators are
intolerable, however small they may be, whenever a leak occurs the unit in question has to be
shut down and isolated for repair. This can be done without significant reducing the power
output only if there are a large number of separate units, any one of which can be isolated
without reducing the total power significantly.
      The outstanding example of the advantages of the modular approach to steam generator
design is afforded by the Russian BN-600 plant. This has three secondary sodium circuits,
each with 8 separate steam generator modules, and each of these consists of separate
evaporator, superheater and reheater sections, making a total of 72 separate heat exchangers.
At least partly because of this, the availability of BN-600 has been consistently high. Since
late 1981, the SGs have been operated at the nominal power and parameters. Some evaporator
modules have been replaced by new ones due to expiry of the projected lifetime.
      SG operation experience shows that the vast majority of leaks occurred where the tubes
are attached to the tubeplate and seldom in tube-to-tube welds. Therefore specific attention in
advanced SG design is being paid to decrease the number of the tube-to-tubeplate welds, as
well as avoiding welds under sodium in the length of the tubes. Progress in this direction can
be achieved by minimising the number of separate units, e.g. by locating the evaporator and
superheater in one unit, simplifying the SG configuration by replacing sodium-heated
reheaters by steam-heated, and using long tubes.
      To ensure satisfactory SG performance there must be an adequate industrial base for the
structural materials (which have to be compatible with both sodium and water/steam at high
temperature) and for manufacture, and a sensitive system for detection and mitigation of
steam/water leaks in sodium.
      Once-through SGs with high unit power have to be made of high-nickel alloy 800 or of
an advanced ferritic steel 9CrlMoVNb development of which started in the USA in 1980. To
minimise or prevent the carbon dissolution from ferritic steels and to improve creep properties
stabilising additives such as niobium and vanadium are incorporated. During the last two
decades excellent results have been achieved in the technology for ensuring high quality of
manufacture of steam generators and studies in realistic conditions of the problems of
thermohydraulics, structural mechanics, etc. have ensured the reliable operation of large once-
through SGs. Successful operation of the four Superphenix SGs, each with a power of
750MW(th) and with few (357) long (~95m) welded helical tubes, holds the key to reliable
and compact SGs for future LMFRs.
      Cost reduction and reliability improvement studies have been performed to select the
steam generator concept for EFR. An integral unit of 600MW(th) has been verified as
favourable based on successful operating feedback from the SPX SGs. The advanced SG for
EFR is a once-through straight-tube unit, without welds in the long (33,3m) tubes with tube to
the tubeplates weld at each end.
      The EFR SG project is widely regarded as successful in matching the designers'
intentions of simultaneously improving the reliability and economics by decreasing the
number of tube-to-tubeplate welds, the structural material content and the SG building
volume. This can be confirmed by comparison of the major characteristics of the BN-600
sectional-modular SGs, with three units each consisting of evaporator(ev) + superheater(sp) +
reheater, with the EFR advanced integral SGs, with (ev + sp) in one unit:

 Reactor     SG power    mass of SG.   Max. tube    Number of     Specific metal    Number of
  Plant       MW(th)        tons       length (m)   tubes in SG      content          tubes to
                                                                  tons/MW(th)        tubeplate
                                                                                    attachments
                                                                                   (welds) per 1
                                                                                      MW(th)
BN-600         490           600           16          6592           1,22              27,0
 EFR           600           150          33,3         1386           0,25             2,3

      For the complete realisation of potentially feasible LMFRs from the point of view of
cost, metal content and reliability new design solutions for SGs and other equipment may be
required, differing from those being used at the present time.
2.3.   Pump oil leaks into the sodium circuit
      Oil ingress into the primary sodium circuits of an LMFR is undesirable because of the
potential release of methane gas through the reactor core, causing positive reactivity effects,
and possible blockage of the fuel subassemblies by solid carbon debris. All large LMFR
sodium pumps have oil-lubricated bearing and seals at the upper end of the shaft (above the
sodium level in the pump casing). There have been several oil leaks into sodium due to non-
optimal pump design and/or operator errors. A major oil leak (possible up to 35 litres) into the
primary sodium circuit took place in PFR. This was a result of a blocked overflow pipe
causing a pressure differential between the gas blanket in the reactor vessels and the pump
casing. Work to recover from the oil ingress problem, most particularly work to install new
primary pump filters, occupied almost a whole year. The length of the outage indicates the
importance of designing to avoid any possibility of spillage of oil from pump bearings and
seals into the sodium coolant No reactivity effects were seen, possibly because the oil was
retained in the pump cone for a prolonged period and broken down slowly without the
formation of large bubbles.
     The EFR design was changed following the PFR oil ingress incident by the introduction
of the innovative features of magnetic bearings and ferro-fluidic seals to eliminate oil
completely and remove the potential hazard of its ingress into the sodium.
2.4.   Air ingress into the argon of the Superphenix reactor cover gas.
      A partial tear of a compressor membrane in a cover gas activity measurement line
resulted in the admission of an argon and air mixture into the reactor, which was at nominal
power. The total pollution was estimated at between 300 and 350kg of sodium oxides. There
was no system to measure the purity of the reactor sodium argon cover gas to provide an
alarm for the operator in case of pollution, and the reactor operated outside the operation
specification range for three days before shutdown. An unplanned reactor outage of over 10
months was needed to remove the impurities from the primary sodium.
        The fundamental causes of the incident were identified as:
-      incomplete analysis during design of the parameters, including gas pressures, in the argon
       gas circuit, and lack of assessment of the risks and prevention of air ingress and leaks in
       general, particularly with respect to the activity measurements circulation pumps;
-      absence of primary argon on-line monitoring devices in spite of such a system having
       been installed in Phenix, PFR, KNK, SNR 300 and other plants;
-      incomplete referencing of equipment and preventive maintenance programmes;
-      incorrect interpretation of the plugging indicator recordings;
-      inappropriate operating specifications both in terms of clarity and applicability.

     Further actions were taken to draw all the relevant information from the incident and to
implement the resulting measures before the unit was restarted.
2.5.     Secondary sodium leaks in Phenix IHX

      Several sodium leaks from the heads of the intermediate heat exchangers (IHXs) took
place during reactor operation. The damage was due to a design error leading to deformations
and stresses because of differential expansion of the external and internal rings at the
secondary sodium exit. The cause was found to be incomplete mixing of the secondary
sodium at the outlet of the tube bundle, resulting in a significant radial temperature gradient
between the outer and the inner sodium flows, the former being hotter. As a result, mechanical
constraints led to overstressing of welds in parts of the secondary sodium duct.
      Serious loss of generation and increased expenses were caused by the need to repair all
the IHXs and then replace some of them. The removal, washing and decontamination of an
IHX was a very difficult maintenance task. It was pointed out by the TCM participants that
IHX operational experience, except for Phenix, is excellent.
2.6.     Spent fuel assemblies handling system

      Spent fuel assemblies from all existing prototype and demonstration LMFRs are taken
out of the reactor and transferred to an intermediate fuel storage drum cooled by sodium. They
remain there until their decay heat has sufficiently decreased for further cleaning and
transport. The drum plays the role of a storage buffer between the reactor and the water
storage pool: it also allows loading and unloading times, and hence the duration of reactor
outages, to be reduced to a minimum.
      The fuel assembly storage drum is generally regarded as the most critical of all reactor
auxiliary system components. Highly reliable cooling systems are needed to remove heat from
the irradiated fuel assemblies. All technical means of attaining this ambitious goal have to be
included into the design and thoroughly evaluated. Diversity, degree of independence from
energy supply (passivity) and simplicity have to be taken into account to prevent accidental
disruption of the irradiated fuel assemblies. Two (BN-350 and Superphenix) of the six
commissioned prototype and demonstration fast reactors have had difficulties in the spent fuel
assembly handling systems due to failure of the storage drum at the beginning of operation.
These failures are believed to have been due to less than optimal structural material
specification.
     The leak in the Superphenix fuel storage vessel had a great impact in suspending plant
operation for 20 months, although the reactor itself was unaffected. Investigation indicated
that cracking in the inner vessel wall, made of 15Mo3 ferritic steel, was caused by
embrittlement of welds due to a combination of stress and a hydrogen-rich environment prior
to power raising. The ferritic steel sodium storage tanks in SNR-300 fabricated in a similar
material suffered weld cracks which were also attributed to hydrogen embrittlement.
     It was concluded that the use of ferritic steels of this type for structures in permanent
contact with sodium should be banned for the future LMFR, austenitic steels being preferred.

     The problem of spent fuel assembly handling at two reactors (BN-350 and Superphenix)
posed by the occurrence of leaks was settled by abandoning the decay storage function of the
drum (this function being taken by the reactor itself) and maintaining only the function of sub-
assembly transfer. It compelled the operator to wait for the decay power to subside before
unloading the core, resulting in long outages.
      The consequence of these incidents for future LMFR projects was the investigation of
spent fuel handling technology aimed at eliminating the intermediate storage drum and
transferring spent fuel assemblies directly from the reactor to the water storage pool. This has
been realised in the large advanced fast reactor projects BN-1600M and EFR. Incorporation of
two or three rows of B4C-filled assemblies between the core and an in-reactor irradiated fuel
store allows the residual power of fuel assemblies to be unloaded to be reduced.
      The loading and unloading operations can be combined with shutdown of the NPP for
maintenance and repair, so that elimination of the storage drum causes insignificant additional
plant outage. For the above mentioned reactors refuelling takes place during scheduled reactor
shutdowns which occur approximately annually. Fuel subassemblies which have been retained
in the in-vessel store during the previous reactor run, and therefore have a lower decay heat
rating, are transferred directly from the reactor to the water storage pool.
2.7. Behaviour of some austenitic steels with sodium under load and high temperature

      A circumferencial crack was detected by beaded wires on a moulded 321 steel tee
junction in the Phenix secondary sodium circuit after 90,000h of operation. The crack was
located in the heat-affected zone of the weld between the tee and the adjacent piping. It was
shown that the crack occurred because of high stresses induced by an important misalignment.
      On three occasions in 1987, 1988 and 1990, small leaks occurred through cracks in the
circumferential welds in the PFR reheater vessels, which were manufactured in type 321
stainless steel.
      Stainless steel type 321 with addition of titanium has been used to enhance the
mechanical performance of the structural material at high temperature (520-550 C). The
intensive French programme of non-destructive tests since 1989 has shown that 321 stainless
steel has not performed satisfactorily over time, with cracks in welded joints occurring under
load and high temperature. The sections of Phenix secondary pipework made in this steel have
been replaced by 316SPH steel.
2.8. Influence of low dose irradiation on the reactor fixed internals.

      Studies carried out in some Member States showed that even low neutron irradiation
doses (of about 2 displacements per atom) has significant effects on near-core structural
material at low and high temperature. It was observed that near core structures — permanent
for 40-50 years of service — have exhibited degradation due to the neutron environment.
      For components operating at the lower temperature range, the main cause of concern is
degradation of fracture toughness due to atomic displacements. For components operating at
higher temperature range, the main cause of concern is grain boundary embrittlement, due to
the formation of helium or irradiation-induced segregation resulting in a reduction in creep
and creep-fatigue resistance. This degradation in properties requires both an optimisation of
materials for life extension consideration and quantitative description for the detailed design.
As a result of the latter work the specification of structural materials has been modified.
      Both in Europe and Japan low carbon stainless steel of type 316L with controlled
addition of nitrogen is recommended for use even at low temperature. At doses above about
15 displacements per atom the degree of embrittlement and the level of swelling in all
materials tested are probably unacceptable for use in critical fixed reactor components.
3.    CONCLUSIONS
The accumulated knowledge on materials, thermohydraulics and mechanical science indicates
that a substantial decrease in investment costs, together with better assurance that safety
margins are effectively maintained, might be derived from a lesser emphasis on "umbrella"
transients, compensated by an accurate analysis of actual transients and operating experience.
Perhaps there is only one disadvantage inherent in the LMFR coolant-liquid sodium, namely
that it interacts chemically with air and water/steam. Therefore, providing integrity of the
sodium circuits is the most important requirement to observe on the LMFR design,
construction and operation tests.
The solution of the problem of the reliable elimination of coolant leaks is determined by the
application of experimentally and analytically proved design, structural materials,
manufacture and installation, as well as quality control at all stages of LMFR components
manufacture. Technological procedures and approaches, as well as quality criteria, should
strictly correspond to the related regulatory documents.
Efficient criteria and rules and effective LMFR technology, as experience has shown, can be
established by design, construction and comprehensive testing of three or four LMFR plants.
This stage has been reached in some countries. For example, in Russia an experimental
reactor BR-10, an experimental 15MW(e) NPP BOR-60, a prototype NPP BN-350 (presently
in Kazakhstan) and a semi-commercial NPP BN-600 have been operating respectively for 40,
30, 25 and 20 years, providing invaluable information on FR technology. That is why the BN-
600 plant has been running successfully for 20 years with an overall lifetime load factor of
-72%. This success was achieved because in the design and construction of the plant,
manufacture of the equipment and operation of the plant past errors were not repeated and
good design solutions were incorporated.

The comprehensive operational experience with LMFRs BN-350, Phenix, PFR, BN-600,
Superphenix and Monju has shown that, if plant components have been designed and
manufactured without errors and representative specimens or models have been tested prior to
installation, reliable operation can be ensured during the whole operational life.

The very low corrosion of sodium, the near atmospheric operating pressure, the use of ductile
structural materials, and the reliable heat removal by a coolant having no phase change, imply
that there should be nothing to provoke loss of the sodium system integrity in a LMFR.
                                                                                          XA0056251
      PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED DURING OPERATION OF THE
      PROTOTYPE FAST REACTOR, DOUNREAY, 1974-1994

      A. CRUICKSHANK, A.M. JUDD
      British Nuclear Fuels Ltd,
      Risley, Warrington, United Kingdom



      Abstract

        The UK Prototype Fast Reactor, PFR, was designed in the 1960s and was operated at
Dounreay in Scotland from 1974 to 1994. By the time it was shut down it had demonstrated
the feasibility of the technology of a large sodium-cooled fast breeder reactor, and had been
shown to operate safely and reliably. It had also provided an invaluable test facility for
advancing the technology, particularly in developing advanced fuel and cladding materials
that had achieved high burnup and neutron dose.

          As is usual in prototype plants the operation of PFR revealed the weak points of the
original design concept. Several difficulties were encountered in the course of its operating
life, all of which were successfully overcome. The purpose of this paper is to describe some
of these difficulties and the steps taken to master them. In this way the benefit of the
experience gained and the lessons learnt can be made available to the designers and operators
of reactors of similar type. The intention is that future generations will not follow false trails
in the further development of this promising technology.




INTRODUCTION

        Nine major incidents and unforeseen developments are described. They are

1. A series of steam-generator gas-space leaks,
2. A major under-sodium leak in a steam generator,
3. The incidence of cracking in the steel of various secondary sodium circuit components,
4. Blockage of the secondary sodium cold trap,
5. Seizure of the primary sodium cold trap pump,
6. The effect of sodium aerosol deposits of the operation of primary circuit components,
7. Malfunctioning and cracking in the air heat exchangers of the decay heat rejection loops,
8. Neutron-induced distortion of core components and its effect on plant_operation, and
9. A major oil leak into the primary circuit.

         Each of these is summarised below, with diagrams. The causes and the steps taken to
rectify the problem are explained, and the general lessons learnt are set out in the context of
the future development of LMFR technology. References are given in the cases for which
more detailed information has been published.
                      1. PFR STEAM GENERATOR GAS SPACE LEAKS

        PFR had three secondary circuits, each of which had an evaporator, a superheater and
a reheater. Figure 1.1 shows the general arrangement, and Figure 1.2 shows an evaporator in
more detail. A total of 37 gas-space leaks was experienced in PFR steam generator units in
the period 1974 to 1984 with 33 of these occurring in evaporators, 3 in superheaters and 1 in
a reheater. All of the gas-space leaks originated at the welds between the tubes and the
tubeplates. The effect of these leaks on PFR availability was considerable, so that the highest
annual load factor prior to 1984 was only 12%.

       PFR went critical for the first time in March 1974 and commissioning of the steam
generators followed. Up to 1976 there were failures in gas-space leaks in one evaporator, two
superheaters and one reheater. These early failures are believed to have been due to
manufacturing faults.

        In the case of the austenitic superheaters and reheaters the leaks gave rise to
considerable concerns about the design. Although both the damaged superheaters continued
in use up to 1986, having had the leaking tubes plugged, one of the superheaters and the
reheater had suffered from caustic stress corrosion cracking of the tube plate caused by the
products of the sodium-water reaction. The superheater was salvaged by grinding out the
cracks and thoroughly washing the tube plate with hot sodium to remove the reaction
products. Damage to the reheater tube plate was so extensive that the tube bundle was


                                         2 Level gauges                 2 Level gauges
                                         sodium outlet side             sodium inlet side
              Hydrogen detector                                                                         _ Hydrogen
                2 Inlet                                                                                 E   detector
                side sodium
                level gauges
             Tubeplate
              assembly.

                                                                     2 Reaction
                                                                     nozzles on N
                                                                     outlet side




                                                                     2 Sodium/water
                                                                     reaction nozzles
                                                                     on inlet side




                                                                                                        Dram nozzle

              Water                                                                         Sodium in
              injection
                                                                                        REHEATER
                Tubes


                             Sodium in
                          SUPERHEATER                              EVAPORATOR
                                                    Drain nozzle




                                         Figure 1.1. PFR Steam Generators

10
scrapped. It was replaced by a plug in the empty reheater vessel until a replacement was fitted
in 1984. For this period the plant had to be operated with reduced reheat capacity.



             STEAM/WATER
            OUTLET NOZZLE—' -                                              WATER INLET NOZZLE

                                                                            SODIUM LEVEL GAUGES 14 OFT)


                  HYDROGEN DETECTOR
                        (2 Off)


                                                                                 CLOSURE HEAD



                                                                                        ARGON INLET
                CASKET ASSEMBLY



         HEADER DRAM NOZZLE




                 CASKET

       ANTI-GAS ENTRAPMENT TUBES

           TUBE GRID PLATES


       SODIUM   PHASE
       HYDROGEN DETECTOR



       SODIUM OWLET NOZZLE




        SEALING BELLOWS

                                                                                     SODIUM /WATER
                                                                                     REACTION OUTLET
                                                                                     NOZZLES 14 OFF)




                                                                                   OUTER SHELL




                                                                            SODIUM INLET NOZZLES
                                                                            FROM REHEATER 14 OFF)




       SODIUM INLET NOZZLES
       FROM SUPERHEATER
            16 OFF)




           FLOW INHIBITORS




                 SODIUM MIXING CHAMBER


                                  SODIUM DRAIN NOZZLE




                                            Figure 1.2. A PFR Evaporator

                                                                                                          11
        Following the early failures of tube-to-tubeplate welds in the two superheaters and the
reheater no further failures occurred in the austenitic units until 1986, when a superheater
tube leaked while the unit was being pressurised with steam prior to being put on line. This
incident is described below.

        In the period 1984 -1987 all the six austenitic tube bundles were replaced by new
tube bundles, shown in Figure 1.3. The design benefited from the early experience of caustic
stress corrosion following the leaks in the austenitic units. The new tube bundles were
fabricated in 9Cr IMo ferritic steel, and six were available to replace the original units by
1984. The replacement work was completed by 1987.




                       Figure 1.3. A PFR Replacement Reheater Tube Bundle

12
        The 33 leaks experienced in the ferritic steel evaporator units (Figure 1.2) were
relatively benign as ferritic steel is not so subject to caustic stress corrosion, but the effect on
availability while leaking tubes were being repaired was considerable.

        The evaporator gas space leaks were all associated with cracking of the tube-to-
tubeplate welds. These were hard and had high residual stresses because there was no post-
weld heat treatment. None of the evaporator leaks gave evidence of wastage damage to the
neighbouring tubes, probably because they were detected early by the installed gas-space
hydrogen detection system. This was based on katharometers and was very sensitive, being
capable of detecting leaks as small as 0.1 mg/s. The leaks were repaired by plugging the
affected steam tubes.

       Nevertheless it appeared that one leak would, after a few days or weeks of further
operation, cause others. It was concluded that residual caustic reaction products in the gas
space above the sodium caused further cracking of welds and initiated more leaks after an
incubation period. Sodium flooding of the tubeplate at a temperature in excess of 400 °C for
periods in excess of 24 hours had some success in removing reaction products. It was also
required to wash out sodium hydrides which could lead to false hydrogen detection signals
when they dissociated at high operating temperatures.

        This did not cure the problem completely, however, and eventually it was concluded
that washing with hot sodium did not remove caustic material from the roots of pre-existing
fine cracks in the welds, so that in the presence of the residual stresses corrosion continued
and the cracks grew to give rise to further leaks.

        The problem was finally solved by the fitting of sleeves which spanned the original
welds, as shown in Figure 1.4. In all 3000 sleeves were fitted over a 14-month period. The
work was completed early in 1984. While sleeving was underway the station operated on a
single circuit. Following sleeving no further problems were experienced with the
evaporators.

Conclusions

        Gas space leaks in PFR steam generators provided valuable information on the
behaviour and detection of such leaks. They proved to be readily detectable by means of the
hydrogen generated. Careful washing of the tubeplates with hot sodium limited the numbers
of leaks and avoided major further plant damage, but did not cure the problem. Eventually a
radical solution, involving sleeving all the tub-to-tubeplate weds in the three evaporators, had
to be adopted.

        The type of direct tube-to-tubeplate weld adopted initially at PFR, which could not be
heat treated after manufacture, should be avoided in future fast reactors. Austenitic steels are
unsuitable for LMFR steam generators because of the high risk of caustic stress corrosion
damage following even small leaks.




                                                                                                  13
                                         STEAM SIDE




                                                             EXPLOSIVE WELD




                                                                EVAPORATOR
                                                                 TUBEPLATE




                     Figure 1.4. A PFR Evaporator Weld Repair Sleeve



                            REFERENCES TO SECTION 1

E R Adam and C V G Gregory "A Brief History of the Operation of the Prototype Fast
Reactor at Dounreay": The Nuclear Engineer, 1994,35.112 - 117




14
2. THE UNDER-SODIUM LEAK IN PFR SUPERHEATER 2

        An under-sodium leak occurred in PFR superheater 2, one of the original units made
from austenitic steel, in February 1987. It provided valuable information on the behaviour of
sodium-water reactions in an operating steam generator and led to a complete re-assessment
of the design-basis steam generator accident for subsequent fast reactors.

         On 27 February 1987 PFR was operating at full power when a sodium-water reaction
trip was caused by the rupture of a bursting disc on the stem side of superheater 2. This
initiated a dump of the steam and sodium in the secondary circuit and automatic shutdown of
the plant. Shutdown to a safe state took approximately 10 seconds, as designed.

        It was confirmed shortly after the incident that a large under-sodium leak had occurred
in superheater 2. Figure 2.1 shows one of the original PFR superheaters. After the sodium
circuit had been cleaned to remove reaction products the superheater tube bundle was
removed from its vessel in a nitrogen-filled bag and examined. This revealed that between
two tube support grids one of the six baffle plates forming the central sodium inlet duct had
become detached, and the remaining 5 plates in this region were deformed. Considerable
distortion of steam tubes could be seen through the aperture left by the missing baffle plate.

        The entire tube bundle was then dismantled and forty steam tubes were found to have
ruptured, with longitudinal gapes of such a size as to be effectively equivalent to double-
ended guillotine breaks. The locations of the failed tubes are shown in Figure 2.2. Sixteen of
the failures were in the row adjacent to the central sodium duct and faced towards the duct.
Four of the failed tubes had wear flats facing the central baffle and on one of these (tube 16) a
circumferential crack at right angles to the main fracture was apparent. This was opposite a
small wastage pit in the baffle, and it is concluded that this was the initiating leak.

        Evidence of fretting on a further 13 tubes adjacent to the baffle was found, all close to
the seams between the six plates forming the baffle. It was concluded that sodium leakage
through the seams, shown in Figure 2.3, caused flow-induced vibration of the tubes resulting
in contact with the duct and giving rise to wear and the eventual failure of tube 6.

       Subsequent analysis of the event gave rise to the following conclusions:

1.       A total of 40 tubes failed, 39 due to overheating in a period of 8 seconds following the
plant trip. The remaining tube, which initiated the event, failed due to fretting damage caused
by tube vibration.

2.     The primary small leak grew after passing steam for some tens of seconds. Finally it
grew rapidly to give a leak rate of 0.5 to 1.0 kg/s for a period of a few seconds.

3.      This induced a plant trip by rupturing a steam-side bursting disc. Isolating valve
closed, causing the steam flow to stop, but the steam pressure fell relatively slowly over a
period of about 10 seconds.

4.     Other tubes already weakened by fretting failed quickly, within a second or so,
causing an increase in the heat generated by the sodium-water reaction.


                                                                                                15
                                                         SODIUM LEVEL
                                                            CAUSES (a OFT)




                                              SOOWM/WATER REACTION
                                                  OUTLET NOZZLE




                                          SOMUM DRAW NOZZLE




                         SLEEVE




     Figure 2.1 An Original PFR Superheater




16
                            Failed tubes



                                            o 00o°o00o
                                            °

                                                           3
                                                               0OOOoo°OoN
                                                                                   N
                                                               0x-.° (^
                                                                     000  (°0°
                                                                        ^^ {J _ \.




                          O O 0°0
                       ooo   o_o;;o
                        o o o^o                                          o
                       o o o o0o0                                        °

                       .X oJ 0 °c> oo

                        ^ls°oSo°0o°0
                             o°o °°oO                           °*° 0° n°
                                                               •oo°°o°

                                                                    o ooooo
                                                                    o     ^o,
                                  abboo-,o- 0 - 0 - 0 «o-ooX£°°° /


                                  ^^^^
                      Figure 2.2 The Failed Tubes in PFR Superheater 2




                                                Locations of wear
                                                marks on baffle




      Figure 2.3 The Location of Fretting Marks on the PR Superheater 2 Central Baffle


5.    The loss of internal cooling when the steam flow stopped and external heating by the
sodium-water reaction made tube wall temperatures rise.

6.      Reaction zone temperature increased above the boiling point of sodium. This caused
high temperature tube failures at 1325°C to 1345°C, even though the pressure in the tubes
had fallen from 130 bar to 70 - 40 bar by this time.

7.     As temperatures increased further more tubes would have failed but eventually the
steam pressure dropped low enough to prevent further failures and tube swelling.

                                                                                             17
8.      In spite of the large number of tube failures the pressure transient in the secondary
sodium circuit was relatively mild. The maximum pressure in the intermediate heat exchanger
did not exceed about 10 bars, well below its design pressure.

Conclusion

        The under-sodium leak in superheater 2 demonstrated that it is possible for a large
number of tubes to fail due to overheating in a period of a few seconds, but that such an event
is unlikely to cause significant overpressurisation damage in the secondary circuit or the
intermediate heat exchanger. As well as leading to modification of the PFR sodium-water
protection system and replacement of the tube bundle, the incident led to a reassessment of
the design-basis accident for the steam generators of both PFR and EFR. In the case of PFR
the design basis-accident was changed from a single double-ended guillotine fracture to 40
double-ended guillotine fractures spread over a period of 10 seconds.


                              REFERENCES TO SECTION 2

A M Judd, R Currie, GAB Linekar and J D C Henderson: "The Under-Sodium Leak in the
PFR Superheater 2, February 1987": Nuclear Energy, 1992, 31, 221 - 230




18
3. CRACKS IN PFR STEAM GENERATOR VESSELS

        From 1983 until its shutdown in 1994 PFR experienced cracking in type 321 stainless
steel components in its secondary circuits, some cracks leading to sodium leaks. As a result a
substantial repair and inspection programme was required in the final seven years of PFR
operation. Although the two earliest leaks were in pipework (in 1983 and 1986) the majority
were in steam generator vessels. The pipework leaks were only retrospectively identified as
being caused by the same mechanism.

         Figure 3.1 shows a typical steam generator vessel. The vessels were manufactured
from cold rolled annealed type 321 (18Cr lONi ITi) austenitic steel plate. Three cylindrical
courses, together with a flanged upper end and a domed lower end, were welded using type
347 (19Cr 9Ni INb) weld metal. Manual metallic arc weld root runs with submerged arc weld
fill were used. During manufacture the welds were inspected and in some cases inclusions
and other defects were found. These were ground out and made good with additional
rectification welds. None of the welds was stress-relieved. The vessels were considerably
overdesigned to withstand a continuous pressure of 34.5 bar, although the operating pressure
was only 2 bar.




                              Weld A




                              Leak 1990
                              Repair 1987




                             Repair 1987
                             Defect 1990




                             WeldC




                             WefdD




                             Figure 3.1. PFR Reheater 1 Vessel

                                                                                             19
        The first crack occurred on a reheater pipework tee junction in 1983, and the second
on a superheater pipework reducer in 1986. Both caused minor sodium leaks. The cause of
the cracks was not identified at the time. Both leaks occurred at welds in which the large
crystal grain size indicated severe overheating during fabrication.

        In 1987 the first steam generator vessel leak occurred in seam B of the reheater 2
vessel. Following this cracks were found on vessels during every inspection except 1989. All
the cracks occurred in the B, C and D welds with none in A. Seam A is in the gas space,
above the sodium level, and therefore at much lower temperatures than the other seams.
(Following the fitting of the new tube bundles in 1987 weld A also operated under sodium.)
At the final inspection in 1993 cracking was found for the first time in the welds of set-on
features such as the vessel supports and nozzles.

        Detailed optical and scanning electron microscopic examination of samples cut from
reheaters 1 and 2 and superheater 2 were carried out in 1987. In all cases the cracks were
associated with deep weld rectifications in the circumferential weld seams. The cracks either
passed along the fusion line of the rectification or were on or close to the fusion line of the
original rectified weld. Cracks passed through the parent steel along or closely parallel to the
fusion line and through the weld material. Cracking was intergranular.

        The cracking mechanism was identified as delayed-reheat or stress-relief cracking.
Titanium stabilised type 321 steel is subject to this form of cracking, caused by dissolution of
titanium carbide close to a weld fusion line as a result of the high temperatures attained
during welding. Subsequent re-precipitation of the carbides on dislocations produced by weld
shrinkage during high temperature operation locks the dislocations and hardens the matrix.
Relaxation strains occurring during operation causes intergranular failure.

        In total some 27 cracks were detected on such welds during the period 1987 to 1993.
Inspection was by ultrasonics and dye penetrant supported by acid etching of the surface. In
general there was no sign of major escalation of the weld cracking problem during the period
of monitoring. It is possible that cracking would have tailed off as the population of
vulnerable sites diminished.

        Repairs were made by removing the cracked region and welding on a stub nozzle with
a blanked end. The technique is illustrated in Figure 3.2. It was chosen because it allowed all
the work to be done from outside the vessel (so that it was not necessary to open the vessel to
the atmosphere, which would have required scrupulous removal of all the sodium residues),
and because it facilitated thorough ultrasonic inspection of the repair. Smaller defects were
either ground out or backfilled and fitted with strain gauges for monitoring during operation.
The PFR vessels were considerably overdesigned and although the excessive vessel thickness
may have contributed to the cracking it was helpful when it was necessary to grind out
defects.

Conclusion

       The evidence indicated that cracking in PFR steam generator vessels was initiated by
a delayed reheat mechanism driven by residual stresses in the non-stress-relieved welds.
Weld rectification during manufacture gave rise to conditions which favoured cracking. It is


20
                         Two slots are machined          An upper vent             The cap is welded
       Defect situated   at the extremities of the       hole and lower            to the buttenng
       at T on weld      defect and circular buttering   dram hole are drilled
                         is applied to provide a         within the buttenng
                         base tor the repair             through the vessel wall
                                                         and a cap manufactured
                                                         to enclose the area




     Figure 3.2. The Repair Technique for Cracks in the PFR Steam Generator Vessels



probable that replacement of the PFR steam generator vessels would have become necessary
had operations been planned beyond 1994, as the repairs did not prove to be entirely
satisfactory, with the repair welds beginning to develop cracks after a period of operation.


                                  REFERENCES TO SECTION 3

D B Melhuish and A Sandison: "Engineering Improvements to PFR": Nuclear Energy, 1992,
31, 193-205




                                                                                                     21
4. BLOCKAGE OF THE PFR SECONDARY COLD TRAP

        The PFR secondary cold trap vessel and basket are shown in Figure 4.1. Secondary
sodium, partially cooled in a regenerative heat exchanger, was delivered to an annular
chamber. From there it was injected through six 22 mm diameter holes into an annular space
between the vessel and a mesh basket. The vessel was air-cooled and the intent was that the
sodium should be cooled to about 20 °C below its current impurity saturation temperature
before flowing through six annular "doughnuts" of steel wire mesh. The mesh presented a
large surface area for the deposition of sodium oxide and hydride. Cold tap baskets were
regularly removed and cleaned for re-use, fitted with new set of doughnut meshes, when a
gradual reduction in the sodium flow as the mesh blocked up indicated that the maximum
loading had been reached. Expected loadings were in excess of 100 kg of mixed sodium
hydride and oxide.

         The sixth basket was installed in July 1980 and had completely blocked by May 1981
with an estimated loading of only 52.3 kg of mixed oxide and hydride. Since this was not the
first example of erratic cold trap behaviour it was decided to remove the basket for a special
examination to ascertain the reasons for early blockage. Photographic records had been kept
of earlier removals but until then no systematic detailed examination of the distribution of the
deposits in the mesh had been made.

        The deposits are pyrophoric and present a hazard that prevented close examination in
air. On this occasion the trap was removed and kept under argon purge while an introscope
examination was carried out. This gave an initial picture of the nature of the deposit before it
was disturbed by being broken up.

       The results of the examinations are shown in Figure 4.2. The deposits in the mesh
were mixtures of sodium, sodium oxide and sodium hydride of varying composition, while
the deposits on the sides and bottom of the vessel consisting virtually entirely of residual
sodium. Detailed examination of the mesh doughnuts showed that the deposits were largely
confined to the inner part of the annulus and the bottom, which was completely blocked.

        Subsequent analysis suggested that the cold trap had not always been operated in the
most efficient manner. Attempts to trap impurities too rapidly had led to the use of too large a
differential between the actual sodium temperature and the impurity saturation temperature.
The overcooled sodium precipitated its impurity burden preferentially at the bottom of the
vessel and on the outer surfaces of the mesh doughnuts, so that the trap rapidly became
blocked with an impurity loading well below the expected maximum. Modified operating
techniques and led to improved loading and the final cold trap basket trapped in excess of 140
kg of mixed oxide and hydride.

Conclusion

        Inefficient operation of the PFR secondary cold trap led to impurity loadings below
the theoretical maximum. Improved trapping techniques aimed at avoiding cooling the
sodium too far below its saturation temperature, and more careful operation solved the
problem after 1981.



22
     COLD TRAP EMPTYING LINE



     BASKET DRAIN PLUG                   THERMOCOUPLES



     SODIUM LEVEL INDICATORS




     DISTRIBUTION
     CHAMBER




     BASKET CONTAINER




                                         BASKET UNTTS




                                         MINIMUM TEMPERATURE
                                         THERMOCOUPLE




         Figure 4.1. The PFR Secondary Sodium Cold Trap




                                             Dendritic crystals.
                                             E n t r y face   - 68 kg
                                             Bottom plug -       3 Kg
                                             Vessel wall top - 40 Kg
                                             Vessel wall b o t t o m - 25 Kg
                                             Vessel b o t t o m      - 6 Kg




Figure 4.2. The Location of Deposits in the PFR Secondary Cold Trap

                                                                         23
     5. SEIZURE OF THE PER PRIMARY COLD TRAP LOOP SODIUM PUMPS

        The PFR primary cold trap loop (PCTL), shown in Figure 5.1, is an auxiliary circuit
connected to the primary circuit. It purifies the active sodium by removing impurities.
During PFR operation it also supplied sodium coolant to the core melt-out tray situated below
the diagrid in the reactor vessel. During the current decommissioning period it remains in use
for cold trapping, if necessary, and measuring impurity levels in the primary sodium. The
PCTL is situated in a shielded air-cooled concrete vault adjacent to the reactor vessel, as
shown in Figure 5.2.

        Throughout the life of the reactor both the main and standby PCTL pumps have seized
frequently due to sodium rising too high in the pump vessel. The pump vessel sodium levels
are controlled by venting gas from the space above the sodium or injecting gas into it. In
principle the sodium level was raised or lowered in 10 mm steps by operation of the gas
valves in an automatic sequence. In practice, however, it was often necessary to intervene
manually because the gas valves often passed or were blocked. In these circumstances
operator error could easily lead to the sodium level into the annulus round the pump shafts
where it would solidify causing the pump to seize.

        Each time a pump seized attempts were made to remove the sodium mechanically or
melt it by use of the trace heating, but on no occasion did this succeed. Pumps had to be
removed, decontaminated and stripped down in order to free the pump shaft.

        During maintenance it was noted that oxide or hydride could be seen floating on the
surface of the sodium in the pump tank. It was considered that such material, if raised
inadvertently into the vent or feed lines, would contribute to the blocking of the gas valves. In
1988 both main and standby pumps had seized during the year, so during refurbishment a
modification was carried out onthe pumps to deal with the accumulation of these solid
impurities. A jet of sodium was diverted from the discharge sides of the pumps to disperse the
deposits and prevent valve blockages, as shown in Figure 5.3. This modification was not
entirely successful in preventing further blockages and the pumps seized again in 1989 and
1990.




             Figure 5.1. Schematic diagram of the PFR Primary Cold Trap Loop

24
  1 BLAMtET GAS VALVE CHEST
 1 PLUGGMG METER CAB»ETS
 3 KIETPLUGGHG METER
 4 OUTLET PWGQNG METED
 5 COLOTRAPPUMP
 e STANDBY PUMP
 7 COLD TRAP
 » REGENERATIVE HEAT EXCHANGER
 9 ELECTRO MAGNETIC PUMPS
10 SODIUM BOA-TWO VALVES
 11 VAULT COOLMG AIR OUTLET OUCT




                                   Figure 5.2. The PFR Primary Cold Trap Loop




                     Figure 5.3. Modification of the PFR Primary Cold Trap Pumps

                                                                                   25
Conclusion

       Sodium level control problems in the PCTL have frequently required stripdown and
maintenance of the sodium pumps to clear sodium ftorr. :.*>.-? pump shaft annulus. The
problem has never been fully resolved.




26
     6. THE EFFECT OF SODIUM AEROSOLS ON THE OPERATION OF PFR

      Sodium aerosols have been reported as a source of problems in all fast reactors. In
PFR two particular problems arose during operation between 1974 and 1994.

        A diagram of PFR absorber rods is shown in Figure 6.1. PFR had 5 shut off rods
(normally fully raised) and 5 control rods inserted to control power. The rods were essentially
identical B4C assemblies supported by electromagnets. On a trip all ten rods dropped.
Magnet current, apparent rod weight, rod release time and time of flight were measured by
installed instrumentation.


                                               VARIABLE SPEED MOTOR
                                                                           DR»E AND NTBUOCK
                                                                                  «MT




                TOP OF ROTATING SHIELD




                                                                                POWER CABLES


                                                                                   HEAD OF
                                                                                EXTENSION ROD




                 ANTI-VIBRATION OTOLLAQE




                                                                           THERMOCOUPLES




                                  ROD RAISED                      ROD LOWERED


                                    Figure 6. L The PFR Absorber Rods

                                                                                                27
         At the design stage it was recognised that following a trip there was potential for
sodium aerosol to deposit on the parted magnet faces in the gas space. A continuous purge
flow of argon gas was passed through the absorber liner tube to avoid the problem. Following
trips the flow was enhanced to try to prevent aerosol building up. This however did not solve
the problem fully and throughout its operational life PFR suffered from gradual reduction in
the efficiency of the magnets due to the gradual buildup of sodium deposits on the faces of
the magnets. This led to plant trips on a number of occasions due to absorbers dropping off
their magnets during power operation.

        At all shutdowns and after plant trips the electromagnet pick-up and drop-off currents
were measured. These were the minimum magnet currents at which the absorber could be
raised and at which it dropped off after being raised. On the basis of these figures a decision
was made on whether the magnet faces had to be cleaned before return to power. If required
the drive and magnet assembly were removed by simple bagging techniques and the magnet
face was cleaned in an argon purged glove box. The extension rod face was cleaned in situ
using commercial "Scotchbrite" cleaning pads, again making use of a simple bagging
technique.

        Because of the possibility of distortion due to swelling caused by neutron-induced
voidage (NIV), which caused interaction between the rods and the guide tubes, absorber
friction was measured on a regular, but initially infrequent, basis. Each rod in turn was raised
and lowered while the reactor was operating (criticality being maintained by moving the
remaining rods to compensate). The apparent weight of the rod, which varied along the
stroke, was recorded. Up to 1985 measured friction was higher" than expected, at a maximum
of 40 kg compared with an expected level of about 25 kg due to the effect of NIV. The
additional load was thought to be caused by the effects of aerosol but was not particularly
worrying.

        After 1985 when prolonged high power operation became more common friction
levels were found to increase rapidly to about 80 kg. At such levels, coupled with the effect of
magnet face contamination by aerosol, rods were liable to pull off and drop as they were
being raised. Regular weekly exercising of the rods at intervals of seven days was initiated to
monitor this effect.

        Typical rod movements during exercising are shown in Figure 6.2. The exercising was
found to have the effect of reducing friction. Peak friction occurred at about 900 mm (see
Figure 6.2) but the magnitude depended on whether the rods were raised or lowered first.
Lowering first reducing friction levels. Figure 6. 3 shows an actual trace of friction for a
control rod, which in this case started by being raised. The actual weight of absorber plus
extension tube is 230 kg. The dotted line marked FINISH is an immediate partial repeat of the
test showing the decrease in friction resulting from the first test.

         The friction is believed to have been caused by the buildup of sodium aerosol deposits
on the inside of the liner tube and on the extension rod of the absorber in the cool region of
the rotating shield, as shown in Figure 6.4. Lowering the rod moved the deposit on the guide
tubes into the warmer region below the roof insulation where it melted off, reducing the
friction.



28
                               S-        Short Cycle
                              FR -       Full Cycle, Raising initially.
                              FL -       Full Cycle, Lowering Initially.
                             S/D -       Shutdown Cycle


                                                                                         • 1066 mm Fully up

                                                                                    900 mm Approx
                                                                                ——— height of peak
                                                                                    friction point



                                               FLl                     S/D      Normal Operating Range
                                                                                     ( at Power )




                                                                                          0 mm Fully down




   Figure 6.2. Movement of the PFR Absorber Rods during Exercising




                                                                                 -1000



                                                                                 -900


                                                                                -800

                                                                                          3J
                                                                                 700 O
                                                                                          o
                                                                                         rn
                                                                                 600 jjj
                                                                 START

                                                                                 500 3



                                                                                 400



                                                                                 300



                                                                                 200



                                                                                 100




                 170   180   190   200    2»   220   230   210   250

                 LOWERING                                  RAISING
                                                                           kg


Figure 6.3. Apparent Weight of a PFR Absorber Rod during Exercising

                                                                                                              29
                                                      ROD HEIGHT Imm)




                                                       GUIDE
                                                       TUBE




                                                       KEYS    60»C«




                                                               500»C*




                                                               secw«

     Figure 6.4. Location of Sodium Aerosol Deposits on a PFR Absorber Rod Mechanism


       In 1988   a special glove box was made which allowed examination of the liner tubes
and the extension rods. Examination of a number of rods confirmed that sodium deposits
were present but in smaller quantities than expected and confined to the keyway of the
extension rods. None were found on the liner tube as originally hypothesised. The sodium
was soft and easily removed. Although the absence of deposits other than in the keyways was
surprising, when they were removed the friction of the restored rods to normal. It took some
40 efpd of operation for friction levels to begin to rise noticeably.

Conclusion

        In the case of PFR sodium aerosols caused no operational problems because
movement of the absorber rods was carefully monitored and deposits were cleaned off well
before they interfered with the mechanisms. The only effect was the operational burden of
exercising the rods and cleaning the magnet faces. Aerosols had no observable effects on
magnet parting times or rod drop times.




30
                  7. CRACKS IN THE PFR AIR HEAT EXCHANGERS

        PFR had three thermal syphon decay-heat rejection loops, shown in Figure 7.1. Each
consisted of a NaK-filled loop connecting a heat exchanger coil positioned in the main reactor
vessel adjacent to an intermediate heat exchanger to an air heat exchanger (AHX) on the roof
of the reactor containment building. In the event of loss of electric power supplies each loop
was capable of removing 1.5 MW of decay heat from the reactor by natural convection. Each
AHX was equipped with 2 fans connected to emergency diesel power supplies, which could
enhance the decay heat removal to over 4 MW per loop. When the rector was operating
normally heat removal was limited by dampers which restricted the airflow to the AHXs.

        Although the thermal syphon system operated well, by 1984 it had become apparent
that the AHXs suffered from a systematic fault leading to failures and leaks. Each AHX
consisted of forty serpentine parallel tubes welded to pulled tees in two headers, as shown in
Figure 7.2. The tubes were finned along the straight lengths but plain at the bends, which
were clamped together and supported. Further rigidity was provided by cleats which were
welded to the tops of the fins on adjacent tubes. Flow of NaK was from the top down. Leaks
were occurred at the welds between the tubes and the pulled tees in the headers.

        As an interim measure operational constraints were imposed as the frequency of
failures could have invalidated the risk analysis in the safety report, and hence jeopardised the
authorisation to operate the plant. Meanwhile the AHXs were heavily instrumented with
strain gauges and thermocouples to identify the cause of the problem and indicate a solution.



                               Reactor                   Cowl with
                               Secondary                 flap valves
                               Containment
                               Building




    Figure 7.1. Schematic Diagram of a PFR Thermal Syphon Decay Heat Rejection Loop

                                                                                                 31
        The measurements indicated that the problems occurred essentially because the AHX
tubes were in parallel, and were horizontal with no fall to ensure good filling. When the
AHXs were filled gas locks were occurring at the pipe bends. The gas-locked tubes remained
cold, and as a result oxide impurities could be precipitated causing permanent blockages.
Because of temperature differences between a cold blocked tube and the adjacent hot tubes to
which it was clamped, large stresses were imposed. As a result the weakest point in the
system, the weld between the tube and the header, was stressed, suffered cracking and
eventually leaked.

        Replacement AHXs (RAHXs) were manufactured to an improved design which
avoided the problem of gas locks and afforded greater toleration of loss of flow in individual
tubes. The following changes were made and are shown in Figure 7.2.

1.      A 2° slope was given to the tubes to give better venting and drainage.
2.      Each tube was given individual support,
3.      The tube-header connections were reinforced.
4.      Larger diameter headers were fitted to give better NaK distribution.

        Two of the new RAHXs were fitted in 1986 and the third in 1987. Operation was
trouble free until 1996, when the thermal syphons were finally emptied for decommissioning.
                          CLEATS WELDED TO RN6                              fa DIA HEADERS
        STRAP BRACKET
                                                                          ""-WEAK TEES


                                                                        snap BACKET

                            ORIGINAL AHX TUBE. PROFILE


                        just SUPPORT PLATER              f SLOPE
                                                         L                  IODIA HEADERS




                             REPLACEMENT AHX TUBE PROFILE


     Figure 7.2. The Original and Replacement PFR THermal Syphon Air Heat Exchangers

Conclusion

         In 1984 a common mode failure problem in the PFR thermal syphon AHXs was
jeopardising the plant authorisation. A rapid research, development, manufacturing and
installation programme solved the problem by 1986. It is notable that the design feature
essential to solving the problem was the inclusion of a simple 2° slope on the tubes.

                               REFERENCES TO SECTION 7

D B Melhuish and A Sandison: "Engineering Improvements to PFR": Nuclear Energy, 1992,
31,193-205

32
 8. THE EFFECT OF NEUTRON-INDUCED DISTORTION ON THE OPERATION
                             OFPFR

        Radiation damage resulting from the high neutron fluxes and operating temperatures
of a fast reactor can give rise to dimensional changes in core components. The mechanisms
involved are swelling caused by neutron-induced voidage (NIV), and radiation creep.

         These phenomena affect core components by causing axial extension, bowing in
transverse gradients of neutron flux or temperature, and dilation. NIV was first detected
during post-irradiation examination of components from the Dounreay Fast Reactor (DFR) in
1965. PFR had been designed in 1963 without taking account of the need to accommodate the
effects of NIV. In consequence calculation routes had to be developed to predict the distortion
of PFR core components, so that they could be managed in such as way that operation would
not be impeded. In particular it was essential to be able to ensure that no core component was
at risk of becoming so distorted that it interfered with the movement of the absorber rods or
could not be removed. The calculations, including the important effects of interaction
between components, were based on empirical material deformation rules obtained from post
irradiation examination of irradiated components. They were successful in guiding operations
except when problems arose due to unexpectedly rapid growth of particular materials.

        It was necessary to predict the bowing of fuel subassemblies in order to prevent
handling problems. The operating limit was 14 mm bow at the subassembly shoulder. Bows
beyond 21 mm at the subassembly shoulder would have presented difficulties when it came to
extraction from the core. Subassemblies were routinely rotated through 180° part way
through their residence in the core in order to correct the bowing.

        Immediately before refuelling operations in PFR three sweep arms were employed to
ensure that there were no obstructions above the core which would prevent rotation of the
rotating shield, as shown in Figure 8.1. At the start of a reload in 1988 the sweep arms were
found to contact or partially contact objects in two core positions. These positions were
identified as containing subassemblies with cold-worked EN58B steel wrappers, with a
calculated dose of greater than 60 displacements per atom (dpa).

        Using a special tool the heights of all subassemblies of the same material were
checked. A distinct trend of rapid increase of growth at doses above 50 dpa was revealed as
shown in Figure 8.2, although not all subassemblies were affected. Two subassemblies in
particular. ''JRA" and "GYN" (see Figure 8.2), had measured growths of about 40 mm. As a
result all components with predicted doses likely to exceed 50 dpa by the end of the next run
were removed from the core. Considerable difficulty was experienced in handling the
severely distorted components and special tools had to be manufactured for their extraction
and removal from the reactor.

         Although the absorber rods and associated components in PFR were manufactured
from nimonic PE16. an alloy known to be subject to low swelling, it was important to ensure
that NIV distortion would not prejudice operation of the system or hinder rod drop in a
SCRAM. The major cause for concern was distortion of the guide tube in which the absorber
rod moved, either by NIV bowing or by pressure on it from adjacent bowed fuel
subassemblies. In addition to the calculations, regular exercising of the absorber rods over
their full stroke gave assurance that no such problems were arising.

                                                                                                33
                    SWMP Ann
                                                                -f




     Figure 8.1. Location of an Elongated Subassembly in the PFR Core by the Sweep Arms

                                                       GYN
                                                             JRA
      35



      30
E
      25

D)
C     2(H
CO
.c
o
D)
c
0)    10
-J


                           X


              xjk
                          "TV

     -5
              10     20        30   40   50   " 60      70    80     90     100    HO     120


                                          DOSE ( d p a )

             Figure 8,2. Increase in Length ofENSSB Subassembhes in the PFR Core

34
         On only one occasion were there observable effects in the operation of an absorber. In
this instance a shut off rod developed unusually high and increasing friction at the top of its
stroke while being exercised. Although the rod operated correctly during subsequent trips,
calculations indicated that the problem was probably caused by interaction of the guide tube
with an adjacent distorted fuel subassembly. The subassembly was discharged, and PIE
confirmed the analysis. It was another subassembly clad in cold-worked EN58B, with higher
than expected swelling. The allowed doses for EN 58B was reduced to prevent further
problems of this sort.

Conclusion

         Large differences in NIV swelling rates could occur in different batches of the same
material. This led to handling problems in the case of components made of cold-worked
EN58B. Materials chosen later in the lifetime of PFR. such as nimonic PE 16, had
considerably lower swelling rates. Components manufactured from the ferritic steel FV 448,
which was under test at the time of PFR closure, had extremely low swelling rates. NIV
distortion was not expected to be life-limiting for this material.




                                                                                            35
                     9. THE PFR PRIMARY CIRCUIT OIL SPILL

       The PFR primary sodium circulation system is shown in Figures 9.1 and 9.2, and
Figure 9.3 shows details of a primary sodium pump (PSP). The sodium from each PSP flows
through filters and a stop valve to the diagrid, and thence to the fuel subassemblies. Each
subassembly has a filter at its inlet. Figure 9.4 shows the relationship between the pump and
subassembly filters.

        In 1974 primary sodium pump 2 (PSP 2) was removed from the reactor for
modifications to its instrumentation and was noticed to be heavily contaminated by a black
sooty deposit. In the same year the charge machine was removed, revealing that its immersed
surface was black with adherent tarry lumps.




                                                                                PRIMARY
                                                                                 PUMP


     I.H.X.

                                                                                 PRIMARY
                                                                                PUMP VALVE




                            Figure 9.1. The PFR Primary Circuit

36
                                                      PRIMARY PUMP MOTOR
                                                      U1 FALSE FLOOR
                                                      BEARING
                                                      OIL CATCHPOT
                                                      THERMAL SHIELD
                                                      HOCKEY STICKS
                                                      PUMP CONE
                                                      PSP INTAKE
                                                      PSP OUTLET PIPES
                                                      FUELSUBASSEMBLY
                                                      FUEL CARRIE-R
                                                      DIAGRID
                                                      OIAGRID COOLING PIPES
                                                      PSP VALVE
                                                      FILTERS
                                                      BIOLOGICAL SHIELD ROOF
                                                      PSP VALVE ACTUATOR
                                                      OIL FILTER
                                                      OIL COOLER
                                                      OIL MAIN & STANDBY PUMPS
                                                      OIL SUMP
                                                      BEARING OIL PIPEWORK




Figure 9.2. A PFR Primary Sodium Pump and its associated Valve and Filter Assembly

                                                                                     37
                                                                        reactor roof
                                                                   cone flow-exit holes
                  free surface                                       4 off x 50.80mm dia.)
                  (running)

                                                                swan-neck tube
                                                               ( 4 o f f x 44.45mm dia.}


                                                                     .radiation shield


                  pump shaft"      '""                           pump housing

                                                            ffsodiym_cold pool level

            bearing leakage
            flow




                 hydraulic bearing


                    9 off x 1/4"                               f^- pump entry.flow
                    drain holes




                Figure 9.3. Detail of a PFR Primary Sodium Pump Housing


        During this period of operation some 65 litres of oil had been lost from the pump
upper seal oil systems, part of which is believed to have entered the reactor vessel. When the
reactor was taken critical no effects of the oil were observed. It is suspected, however, that as
a result of the spill the filter on PSP 2 valve ("O" in Figure 9.2) failed due to high differential
pressure because it became blocked by oil-sodium reaction products. It is also thought that
partial blockage of the pump casing overflow pipe (Figure 9.3) was to lead to the major
problem in 1991.

        No further problems were observed until 1990 when it was noted that PSP1 drive
current was slowly dropping at constant pump speed and its discharge pressure was rising.
The situation was under observation when suddenly the current rose, the discharge pressure


38
                                         DEFLECTOR
                                   i i
           PRIMARY SODIUM
           PUMP UPPER                                 DRAINS TANK
           BEARING




                                                           PUMP CASING
                                                           OVERFLOW PIPE
         50.60mm DIA                                       44.45mm DIA
        PUMP CASING DRAIN                             SODIUM EXPELLED BY            Fuel
             HOLES                                   SODIUM BEARING BELOW       Sub-Assembly

                                                     RADIATION SHIELD                n
                                                     OVERFLOW PIPE
            Sodium Bearing                             OUTLET
            pressure provided by                                                           • PIN-GRID GAPS
            connection through
            filters, to output                             PRIMARY SODIUM                     ( 1.1mm t
            annuius of Pump —                              PUMP INLET

                                                           PRIMARY SODIUM
                                                           PUMP OUTLET

                                                                                             FILTER
                                                                                             ( 0.59mm)


                                                           FILTERS
                                                            .53mm)
                                                           Gas Disantrainment
                                                           Columns ( 10.0mm )

                                                                                               Fuel
                                                                                               Carrier




                    Figure 9.4. Filter Mesh Sizes in the PFR Primary Circuit


fell and the flow of coolant through the core increased. A similar sequence of events occurred
a few weeks later, when flows and current returned to normal. Although no oil spill was
recorded it is now believed that oil had entered the system and blocked the filter of PSP 1,
causing it to fail in stages. When it had failed completely and offered no resistance the
coolant flow returned to its normal value.

                                                                                                         39
       In 1991 a similar effect began to appear on PSP 3, and by the middle of the year the
coolant flow was estimated to be 82 % of normal. Again no source of this apparent blockage
is known but an oil spill is suspected.

        On 24 June 1991 there was low flow in the argon gas blanket circulating system.
During attempts to improve the flow by venting the gas blanket, high radiation levels in the
PSP 2 well indicated that sodium had been raised into the top bearing drains tank. This was a
result of the blocked overflow pipe causing a pressure differential between the gas blankets in
the main vessel and the pump casing. The method used to vent the gas blanket resulted in a
preferential flow of gas from the pump casing, reducing the pressure in it and forcing sodium
up the pump shaft. On this occasion it is certain that oil was displaced from the drains tank
into the reactor primary circuit.

        Some subassembly core outlet temperatures in the sector of the reactor supplied by .
PSP 2 began to rise but stabilised after about 1.5 days. An accelerated increase in PSP 3 filter
pressure differential was noted (by now of course PSP 3 filter was the only one intact). The
plant was under close observation when on 29 June the oil bearing on PSP 2 failed
completely causing a further oil spill, and the plant was tripped. It was observed from flow
and differential pressure readings that PSP 3 filter failed at this time.

       It is estimated that up to 17 litres of oil was released into the cone of PSP 2 during the
June 1991 incidents. Release of oil debris from the pump cone into the main primary circuit
was gradual, taking about 1.5 days as indicated by the increase of core subassembly outlet
temperatures and the increase in the primary pump valve filter pressure drop.

        A major effort was required to remove all three valve and filter assemblies from the
reactor for examination. These were the longest components in the reactor vessel, at 12
metres, and required considerable care in handling. Examination showed that at least one
panel of each valve filter had failed, and oil-related debris was found on all the filters. A
number of the fuel subassemblies which had showed outlet temperature rises during the
incident were removed, and oil-related debris was found on their inlet filters and wrappers.

       The result of the oil ingress was an 18-month shutdown while PSP valve and filter
assemblies were removed and new filters were fitted. The pump seal oil systems were
modified to prevent any further possibility of oil ingress, and alarm and trip systems were
added to prevent blockage of the pump filters in order to protect the subassembly filters.

        Very fine particles of carbon were found in primary sodium samples after 1974. These
are believed to have come from the 1974 oil ingress, and it appears that in the long term oil
debris breaks down into finely-divided carbon particles which are dispersed in the sodium,
pass through the filters, and circulate without obvious effect.

Conclusion

        Oil ingress into the primary circuits of an LMFR is undesirable because of the
potential release of methane gas through the core causing reactivity effects, and possible
blockage of the subassembliejTby solid carbon debris. In the case of PFR no reactivity effects
were seen, possibly because the oil was retained in the pump cone for a prolonged period and


40
broken down slowly without the formation of large bubbles. In the long term oil bearings are
probably best avoided. The EFR design was changed to gas bearings-for its PSPs following
the PFR oil ingress incident.

                                ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

       The work described in this paper was originally financed by the UK Department of
Trade and Industry. Preparation of the paper was financed by British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.

                              REFERENCES TO SECTION 9

A M Judd "Leakage of Pump Bearing Oil into the PFR Primary Sodium, June 1991":
Proceedings of a Technical Committee Meeting on Material-Coolant Interactions and
Material Movement and Relocation in Liquid Metal Fast Reactors, 1994, IAEA IWGFR/89,
433 - 444

F A Kozlov, YI Zagorulko and Y P Kavaliov "Investigation of Sodium-Mineral Oil
Interaction in the Experiments Modelling Oil Ingress Phenomena on PFR", ibid, 445 - 460




                                                                                           41
   SODIUM LEAKAGE EXPERIENCE AT THE PROTOTYPE FBR MONJU

   A. MIYAKAWA, H. MAEDA, Y. KAMI, K. ITO
   Monju Construction Office,                                                             XA0056252
   Japan Nuclear Cycle Development Institute,
   Fukui-ken, Japan

   Abstract
            Monju is Japan's prototype fast breeder reactor :280 MWe (714MWt), fueled with
     mixed oxides of plutonium and uranium, cooled by liquid sodium. Construction was
     started in 1985 -and initial criticality was attained in April 1994
            On 8th December 1995, sodium leakage from a secondary circuit occurred in a
     piping room of the reactor auxiliary building. The secondary sodium leaked through a
     temperature sensor, due to the breakaway of the tip of the thermocouple well tube
     installed near the secondary circuit outlet of the intermediate heat exchanger (IHX). The
     reactor remained cooled and thus, from the viewpoint of radiological hazards, the safety
     of the reactor was secured. There was no release of radioactive material. There were no
     adverse effects for personnel and the surrounding environment. The thermocouple well
     tube failure resulted from high cycle fatigue due to flow induced vibration. It was found
     that this flow induced vibration was not caused by well-known Von Karman vortex
     shedding, but a symmetric vortex shedding. The design of the thermocouple well, which
     was subject to avoid this phenomenon, was reviewed. A new design guide against the
     flow-induced vibration was prepared by JNC (Japan Nuclear Cycle Development
     Institute). That is more comprehensive and definitive than the existing guide "ASME
     N-13 00" (Flow-induced vibration of tube and tube banks). New thermocouple well designs
     were proposed consistent with this design guide.
          To prevent a recurrence of the secondary sodium leakage incident, comprehensive
     design review activities were started for the purpose of checking the safety and reliability
     of the plant. As a result, several aspects to be improved were identified and
     improvements and countermeasures have been studied. The main improvements and
     countermeasures are as follows:
          - To enable the operators understand and react to incidents quickly, new sodium
             leakage detectors (TV monitors, smoke sensors) and a new surveillance system will
             be installed.
          - To reduce the amount of sodium leakage and damage by spilt sodium, the drain
             system will be remodeled to shorten the drain time.
          - To extinguish a sodium fire in the secondary circuit, a nitrogen gas injection system
             will be installed.
          - To limit the spread of aerosol, the secondary circuit area will be divided into four
             smaller zones.

          These countermeasures will enhance the safety and reliability of the plant with
     regard to sodium leakage incidents.


1. INTRODUCTION

    The construction of Monju is a major milestone in the Japanese national FBR development
project which is based on the Atomic Energy Commission's long-term nuclear energy program. The
Japan Nuclear Cycle Development Institute (JNC) is responsible for the management of the project.
Construction of Monju began in October 1985 at a site near the Tsuruga city. The principal data on
plant design and performance are shown in TABLE 1. Loading of the fuel assemblies into the core
started in October 1993 and the reactor attained initial criticality in April 1994. Monju achieved

                                                                                                    43
TABLE 1. PRINCIPLE DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE DATA OF MONJU

 Reactor type                           loop-type       Reactor vessel
 Number of loops                          3                height / diameter                      18/7m
 Thermal output                             714 Mwt     Primary coolant systems
 Electrical output                         280 Mwe        Primary coolant sodium mass            760 ton
 Fuel material                             PuO2-UO2        Inlet / outlet reactor temperature    397/529 °C
 Core dimensions                                          Primary coolant flow rate               5.1X106kg/h/loop
  Equivalent diameter                     1,790 mm        Primary coolant flow velocity            6m/s(inlet),4m/s(outlet)
  Height                                     930 mm      Secondary coolant systems
 Plutonium enrichment (inner core / outer core)            Secondary coolant sodium mass        760 ton
  (Pu fissile %)                                          Inlet / outlet IHX temperature           325/505 °C
  Initial core                              15/20          Secondary coolant flow rate           3.7X106kg/h/loop
  Equilibrium core                         16/21          Secondary coolant flow velocity        5 m/s
 Fuel inventory                                         Water - steam systems
  Core (U+Pu metal)                     5.9 t             Feed water flow rate                    113.7X10 4 kg/h
  Blanket (U metal)                     17.5 t            Steam temperature (turbine inlet)     483 °C
 Average burnup                          80,000 MWD/T     Steam pressure (turbine inlet)        12.7 MPa
 Cladding material                     SUS316             Type of steam generator                Helical coil
 Cladding outer diameter/thickness   6.5/0.47mm         Refueling system                         Single rotating plug
 Blanket thickness                                                                                   with fixed arm FHM
  Upper / lower / radial               30/35/30cm
                                                        Refueling interval                        6 months
 Breeding ratio___________              1.2
   Japan's first generation of electricity by an FBR in August 1995 and the electric power was raised
   gradually for a program of power buildup tests to be carried out; the rated power test planned for June
   1996. It was in the course of this program that the tip of a thermocouple well tube in the secondary
   circuit (loop C) broke away causing a sodium leak on 8th December 1995.
         This paper summarizes the sodium leak incident, the cause of thermocouple well tube failure,
    and the improvement and countermeasure programs against sodium leakage incidents.

   2. SUMMARY OF THE ACCIDENT AND POST-ACCIDENT RESPONSE

          After a plant trip test, Monju restarted operation on 6th December 1995. On 8th December,
    power was being raised for the next plant trip tests, part of 40% electric power tests. The thermal
    power had reached 43% when an alarm sounded at 19:47 due to an off-scale sodium temperature at
    the outlet of IHX in the secondary circuit loop C. Afire alarm (smoke detector) sounded at the same
    time. A sodium leak alarm in the secondary circuit followed. The plant conditions of Monju at that
    time are shown in Fig. 1. The presence of smoke was confirmed when the door of the piping room
    was opened. The plant operators decided to begin normal shutdown operations becausethey judged
    it was a small sodium leak had occurred. Reactor power-down operations began at 20:00.
          The state inside the piping room (C) was checked again and an increase in white fume was
    observed. Accordingly, the reactor was manually tripped at 21:20. After the trip, the reactor was
    cooled down by the auxiliary cooling system (ACS) and was maintained in the low-temperature
    shutdown state. To minimize leakage, sodium in the secondary circuit (loop C) was drained at
    22:55 and drain operations were complete at 00:15, the following day.
          As it was in the secondary circuit, there was no release of radioactive material. There were no
    adverse effects for personnel and the surrounding environment.
          An inspection of the affected piping room on 9th December confirmed the presence of
    solidified materials associated with the sodium leak around and near the thermocouple well of the
    outlet of the secondary side of IHX. The state of the piping room after the sodium leak is shown in
    Fig.2. Approximately 1m3 of a sodium oxide on the 6 mm thick steel floor liner formed a
    semicircular mound, nearly 3 m in diameter and 30 cm high. Sodium aerosol was lightly diffused over
    and accumulated on the floor and walls of the room. The ventilation duct directly under the

Outer shielding wal
                                                   Isolation vulve
                                                                          ........   | ..... ——
                                                           Jt



                                                                             Superheater    ^

                                                                     Air cooler        f±n)                           eiecmcai
                                                                                                      Turbine speed    output
                                                                                                        3600 rpm      112MWe
                      Intermediate     Primary                       )     I                    C5?
                                          um
                      heat exchanger   P P




                                                                            Evaporator




                                                   Isolation vulve




                                Fig 1. MONJU plant condition (just before the sodium leak).

                                                                                                                          45
                                   Temperature
                                     sensor

 Containment Vessel
       penetration
                                             Thin layer of deposits over
                                             the insulation cover plate



     Deposits on the
     hanger support



                                                                       .Half the perimeter of the ventilation duct facing the
                                                                       wall is lost to a width ofabout25cmandlumpsof
                                                                       deposits round the opening
                                                                 A semi-sphencal lump of deposits at the temperature sensor
                                                                 and the external insulation cover plate directly underneath lost

                                                                 Outer wall of Containment Building (Concrete)
                                                                       A semi-circular pile of deposits(3m in diameter, 30cm
                                                                       high) formed on the steel floor liner
                                                        " An hole formed in the grating with globules of deposits
  The color of the concrete wall turned blackish         adhering the edges

                                           Fig. 2. Sketch of the affected area.


thermocouple well developed a hole extending over half the perimeter facing the wall with lumps of
deposits around the opening. On the steel walkway grating under the thermocouple well, an opening
was formed with globules of deposits stuck around the edges. There were no further anomalies
observed in the piping of the secondary circuit. Sodium compounds covered the entire floor of the
loop C steam generator (SG) room adjacent to the piping room and the passages on the first and
second floors.
      Temperature sensor and the well tube which leaked was examined to investigate the cause. On
7th and 8th January, radiographs were taken of areas close to the temperature sensor in order to
estimate the extent of adherent sodium compounds around the temperature sensor and to assess its
structural condition. The thermocouple (3 mm diameter) was found to be bent at 45 degrees toward
the downstream flow direction. The protective tube of the temperature sensor was found to be filled
 with sodium compounds. On 9th February, the temperature sensor was cut out for detailed
 investigation.
      On 28th March, the sleeve tip, a cylinder 1 cm in diameter and 15 cm in length, was located in
 the sodium-inlet part of the superheater, and JNC recovered the broken sleeve tip on April 24.

3. INVESTIGATION OF THE CAUSE

     A taskforce was formed to direct the investigation of the incident. This taskforce was
organized by Science and Technology Agency (STA) and the members consisted of STA's Nuclear
Safety Technology Panel experts. JNC performed its own work under the direction of the
Taskforce.
      The outline of the investigation works was as follows ;

A. The affected temperature sensor
     The thermocouple wires are enclosed by a sheath which is itself housed within the well tube.
The tip of well tube is inserted horizontally into the center of the pipe. This tip (some 15 cm in
length) is thinner in diameter than the base of the sensor. (Fig.3)


46
Inner cover of thermal Insulator                        Outer cover of thermal Insulator



Secondary main pipe
      (558.8 mm #-9.5mm')




Flow direction
                   Guide tube for thermocouole




                       Fig. 3. The thermocouple well of the secondary circuit.




      X-ray photographs were taken to estimate the extent of adherent sodium compounds around
the temperature sensor and to assess structural condition. These revealed that the tip of the well tube
was missing and the sheath containing the thermocouple wires was bent downstream. Other
anomalies were not observed by the photographs. At that time, it was clear that the sodium leaked
into the temperature sensor through the broken well tube. (Fig.4)
      Temperature sensor, together with a small section of the adjacent pipe wall, was cut out for the
detailed investigation and transported to the Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute (JAERI).

B. The cause of the well tube breakage
       Detailed microscopic and met allograph ical examinations of the well tube and the fracture
surface, examination of welded parts of the well, detailed examination of the sheathed thermocouple
were carried out at JAERI and the National Research Institute of Metals (NRIM). The detailed
measurement of the damaged part (fracture surface) was undertaken with microscopes and laser
microscopes. As a result of these inspections, it was found that the fracture surface showed the
typical features of high cycle fatigue with crack initiation, very slow propagation, and final ductile
rupture, as shown in Fig.5. In parallel, flow-induced vibration analysis and mockup tests were
conducted to identify the direct cause of the failure. These investigations confirmed that the
breakage of the thermocouple well was caused by high cycle fatigue of the well tube tip due to
flow-induced vibration. This vibration was not caused by well-known VonKarman vortex shedding,
but a symmetric vortex shedding (Fig.6). According to fatigue crack analysis on the basis of the flow
rate history, it was estimated that the cracks initiated at the early stage of the 100% flow operation,
propagated in the subsequent operation, finally leading to the well tube failure in the last 40% flow
operation. It was confirmed that the estimated breakage process agreed with the investigation results
of the fractured surface and the full scale in-water experiment .


                                                                                                    47
                                          Gap for monitoring the Sodium Leakage

     Bent at an
     angle of
     approximately 45°C




                       Well Tube
                        (Lost)
     Sodium Flow Direction



                                  Fig, 4. The sodium leak flow path.


                                                                                  crack initiation and coalescent region

                                                       main crack                 metallography and crystalline
                                                                                    dependent fracture surface
 secondary
    crack                                                                         striation region

                                                                                  dimple region



                                                                           i——   protrusion observed
  sodium                                                   sodium
downstream                                                upstream     •^——— crack propagating direction

                                                                       —— - — crack front (presumption)




                secondarycrack


             Fig. 5. Microscopic inspection of the fracture surface of the thermocouple -wall.


4. MEASURES AND SOLUTIONS

A. Prevention of sodium leakage
     It was decided to replace all the thermocouple wells susceptible to vibration in the secondary
circuit with modified designs. A new design guide against the flow-induced vibration was prepared by
JNC. It is more comprehensive and definitive than the existing design guide "ASMEN-1300".
     Using this design guide, three new thermocouple well designs were developed, according to their
functional requirements and locations. All the designs use a tapered well, instead of steep diameter
change. A leak suppression mechanism is also incorporated into the new design. The three
thermocouple designs, Type A, B, and Care shown in Fig. 7, along with the existing design. The
"Type A" thermocouple well is directly welded to the pipe wall, while the "Type B"and "Type C"
thermocouple wells are mounted on the existing nozzles. The three design types have different
penetration designs and different insertion length into the flowing stream.

48
               Symmetric Vortex                                                Karman Vortex




               --*-—                          4                 ^-——-^     \   ~———/ /                 —     ^^-^~
               i   \                          1
         Q          \ Broken                 1
                                             1




                                                              r
                     \
         f 1-2 ~       \ Thermosensor      1
                                           1
                        \
         T3
                          \
                                          I
                                                                               \
                           \
         "5.                \
                             \          /
          £                   \
                               \
                                \     l                                            v Flow Velocity
                                 \    l
                                                                                   fn Natural Frequency
         1                           \
                                      \                                            D Diameter of well
          CD               >
         DC                 1               **"t O   / *" •
                                                                                   y Amplitude Displacement
           0.1-0.2


                                          Reduced Velocity Vr=V/fnD
                        Note:Values in the figure are approximate and
                              reference values
                                            Fig. 6. Explanation of vortex shedding.




               —^                     r^'
                                                              CLD                       CLD
                                                        (CONTACT-TYPE              (CONTACT-TYPE
                                                            LEAK                        LEAK
                                c>                        DETECTOR)                  DETECTOR)



                ^^                        c*^*-
                                 Type-A                        Type-B                   Type-C
Existing
thermocouple                                                        SECONDARY MAIN
well                                                             COOLING SYSTEM
                       SECONDARY MAIN                          -RESPONSE TIME NOT
                       COOLING SYSTEM                               REQUIRED-
                      -RESPONSE TIME
                          REQUIRED-                            • EXISTING NOZZLE TYPE
                     • BUILT-IN TYPE JOINT                       CONNECTION TO THE
                       TO THE PIPE                               PIPE
                                                               • DETECTION AND            -EXISTING NOZZLE
                     • DETECTION AND                                                       TYPE CONNECTION
                      SUPPRESSION FOR                            SUPPRESSION FOR
                                                                 SODIUM LEAKAGE            TO THE PIPE
                      SODIUM LEAKAGE
                  7 WELLS PER LOOP                              3 WELLS PER LOOP          •DETECTION AND        • REMOVE
                  • EVAPORATOR OUTLET                          • IHX HOT LEG               SUPPRESSION FOR        AND PLUG
                  • SUPERHEATER OUTLET                         • IHX COLD LEG              SODIUM LEAKAGE       . 2 WELLS
                                                               •SUPERHEATER INLET         4 WELLS PER LOOP        PER LOOP


       Fig. 7 Modified design concepts for the thermocouple wells on the secondary cooling system.


                                                                                                                             49
B. Mitigation of sodium leakage influence
    A comprehensive review wasperformed concerning sodium leakage. The review concentrated
on the following three points:
     - Detection of sodium leakage at an early stage
     - Reduction of the quantity of sodium leakage
     - Limiting the diffusion of sodium aerosol and the combustion of spilt sodium
     These were chosen in order to investigate if systems and components with regard to the sodium
leakage could be improved or not.
     The design of the systems and components was also reexamined considering the experience
and knowledge accumulated at other fast reactors, research and development results and new findings.
As a result of the review, some additional aspects were appeared. Some existing systems and
components related to sodium leakage were found to require modification, and it was recommend
that new systems and components should be introduced. Typical systems and components are ;
     - Sodium leakage detection system (to be modified)
     - Ventilation system (to be modified)
     - Drain system (to be modified)
     - Partition of the secondary circuit room (to be introduced)
     - Nitrogen injection system (to be introduced)
     - Thermal insulation structures (to be introduced)

       Each of these is described in greater detail below :

  (1) Sodium leakage detection system
           It was possible to detect the sodium leakage because Monju already had sodium leak
      detectors and fire detectors in the secondary circuit. However it was found that these were
      insufficient for the operators to grasp accurately the conditions in the room at an early stage.
      To help the operators confirm sodium leakage more quickly and easily, the detectors will be
      increased in number and diversified method and an integral leakage monitoring system will be
      installed.
           The fire sensors are able to detect sodium leakage by two different methods. One is smoke
      (aerosol) detection and the other is by temperature increase in the room where a sodium fire
      occurs. Monju already used the former method and this type of sensor will be increased to
      detect the sodium leakage more quickly and more certainly. The latter method type fire
      sensors will be introduced for greater diversity in the detection of the sodium fires. Visual
      information was found to be useful for operators to know the condition of the room, and so,
      TV cameras will be installed in the secondary circuit.
            The integral leakage monitoring system will be composed of three parts : detection, data
      processing and monitoring display. Detection will consist of the signals from fire sensors,
       sodium leak detectors, plant process sensors (sodium flow rate, sodium level in the overflow
      tank, etc.) and visual information from the TV cameras.
            A monitoring display panel will be installed in the main control room and information
       from the various sensors and TV cameras will be displayed. The new leakage monitoring
       system should enable the plant operators to take the necessary actions - such as a plant trip
       and loop drain - earlier, since they will be able better to understand the condition at the leak
       site without leaving in the main control room. A schematic of this system is shown in Fig.8.

     (2) Ventilation system
              To control the spread of aerosol and the combustion of sodium, the ventilation system
         will be shut down more quickly by signals from the newly installed integrated leakage
         monitoring system. At present, in the case of small and medium-scale leaks, the shut down of
         the ventilation system is carried out manually by the operators. Only in the case of a large
         sodium leak, the ventilation is shut down automatically by an interlock signal from an
         abnormally low level in the steam generator. At present, if a small or medium-scale leak
         occurs, the sodium aerosol spreads from the leak site room to all areas that are connected by
         the ventilation ducts until the ventilation system is shut down.


50
                                                                 Terminal Unit

                                                                                 Main Sodium Leakage
                                  Data Processing &                              Monitoring Display Panel
                                  Display Control Computer
                                   Monitoring the leakage signals
                                 + Showing sodium leakage alarm
                                   Display the alarmed sensor and
                                   picking up other related sensors
                                 + Display the trend of alamed signal
                                   and related signal
                                   Display and control the TV




TVlmage



                      Fig. 8. Organization of integral leakage monitoring system.




               By connecting the leakage monitoring system signals to the ventilation system via an
          interlock sequence, the shutdown of ventilation system can be achieved within two minutes
          after detection even for small or medium scale leakage.

    (3) Drain system
            To reduce the quantity of sodium leakage, the drain system was found to require two
        improvements. One is the addition of a new drain line pipe at the inlet of the secondary pump.
        The other is the replacement of all drain lines by pipes of larger diameter. In the existing
        system, each drain line has two drain valves in series to prevent accidental draining by single
        valve action error. In future so as to assure the draining, each drain line will have doubledrain
        valves in parallel. After these improvements, the drain time will be shortened from
        approximately 50 minutes to 20 minutes. It is estimated that it takes 40 minutes from the
        occurrence of sodium leakage to finish the drain for the secondary circuit. The modified drain
        system is shown in Fig.9.

   (4) Partition of the secondary circuit room
            To limit the diffusion of aerosol and the combustion of sodium more quickly, the area
       associated with each secondary circuit will be divided into four smaller zones. At first, more
       than four smaller zones were considered because partition is effective in controlling the
       diffusion of aerosol. However, it was found to be difficult to provide a dust-tight structure for
       some of the large openings between the proposed zones which allow air transfer. It was also
       difficult to prevent pressure in smaller zones from increasing and it is almost impossible to
       replace the existing ventilation ducts. Hence, four zones were adopted as the optimal solution.
       The openings for the cables or pipe penetrations through the wall between each zone will be
       improved to be almost airtight and additional isolation dampers will be fitted in the
       ventilation ducts between each zone. Pressure release lines will be installed to prevent an
       increase in internal pressure resulting from the smaller zones. The partition of the secondary
       circuit area is shown in Fig. 10.


                                                                                                      51
Present Drain System




                                                                   Enlargement         ~
                                                                                 Enlargement   ||ff




                                          Addition
                                          Dram Llne
                          Overflow Line




                                                                                                          Enlargement




                          OverfbwTank                                                          DumpTank


                                    Fig. 9. Modified drain system.


                                                                                               Evaporator Zone
                                                       Air Cooler room Zone




                                                      Pump and Pipework
                                                      Zone




                       Existing                                                        Improved

                         Fig. 10. Partition of the secondary circuit area.

  52
  (5) Nitrogen injection system
          To extinguish the sodium fire more quickly and to prevent it from re-igniting in contact
      with oxygen, a nitrogen gas injection system will be installed to cutoff the supply of oxygen.
      The nitrogen injection system is shown in Fig.ll. The tanks are common to the entire
      system and the piping is connected to the each zone. After the personnel evacuation of the
      secondary circuit is confirmed, the operator will release nitrogen gas into the affected zone.
      According to an assessment of the relationship between nitrogen flow rate and extinguishing
      time, if more than 10,000 NmVh of nitrogen gas is injected, a sodium fire can be extinguished
      within 15 minutes for any sodium leak rate.

         Pipework &        Evaporator
         PumpZone          Zone             Tank Zone


        Nitrogen
        Gas
        Release




                   Nitrogen Gas Supply
                                                                           Inside of Auxiliary Building




          Nitrogen Gas Supply System
                            (Present)
         Liquid Nitrogen
         Storage Tank                              Nitrogen Gas
                                                   Storage Tank




         Notes:            : Opened Valve    •Bi : Closed Valve   —fO-   : Check Valve


                                  Fig. 11. Nitrogen injection system.


  (6) Thermal insulation structure
          To reduce the water release from the structural concrete, thermal insulation will be fitted
      to the walls and ceilings. This is important because if a large amount of water vapor is released
      from the concrete during a sodium leaks, there is an increased probability of generation of
      hydrogen and corrosive hydroxide in the chemical composition of the sodium debris. By using
      insulation, the temperature rise of the wall can be brought down to under approx. 100°C. The
      structure of thermal insulation is shown in Fig. 12.


5. ASSEESSMENT OF COUNTERMEASURES AGAINST SODIUM LEAK INCIDENT

     The effectiveness of the plant improvements described above have been assessed by the latest
sodium combustion analysis code, called ASSCOPS. Typical results of analysis are as follows:

                                                                                                          53
(1) Since the duration of the leakage is shortened approximately 40 minutes by the modified
   drain system, the total amount of leakage will be reduced to approximately 50%. The period
   of exposure to high temperature decreases (See Fig.13).

                                       Present State                                                                           Improvement
                                                                                                                                                          Attachment
                                                                                                                                                          Brac el
                                                                                                                                         Light Ceiling
                               -.Structural Concrete               , Ceiling                        Deck Plate     Structural Concrete
      Deck Plate




                                                                                                           Cable Conduit Support             Wall Panel
                                  Cable Conduit Support     Cable Conduit Support
                                                                                                                               Cable Conduit Support



                                          Fig.      12. Thermal insulation for walls and ceiling.


                          02                                                                 02

                                 Start of Na Drain                                  c                   StartofNaDram
                                                                                    o
                                        '        Finish of Na Drain                        015
                                                   (LeakageStop)                                             Finish of Na Dram
                                                                                                              (LeakageStop)

                                                                                    «-           01 -
                                                                                    O

                                                                                    c
                                                                                    3
                                                                                           005
                     005-

                                                                                     CD
                                                                                    ,O


                                                 Time (h)                                 1000                      Time (h)
                    1000




                                                 Time (h)                                                           Time (h)
                                        Present System                                                           Improved Sytem


                   Fig.        13. Effectiveness of improvements (pipework room, leakage rate: O.lt/h)
                                                     (without nitrogen release).


 54
(2) Since the temperature rise of the concrete is reduced from over 200 centigrade to
   approximately 100 centigrade by the thermal insulation on the walls and ceilings. At this
   temperature, the water release is considerably reduced. (See Fig. 14).
(3) Since the ventilation system is shutdown automatically and the air inventory in the room is
   reduced by the division into four smaller zones, oxygen concentration in the combustion
   room and neighboring room is reduced. (See Fig. 15).

                                   1 cm below the Surface                                 1cm below the Surface
            pV 300 -                                           P 300 4
                                                               0)




            ;: 200-
                                                               !
                                                               8 200;
                                                                     ,
                                       Leakage Stop                                 Leakage Stop
                                                               £
                S 100-                                         2 100 -



                                     Tme (h)                                                Tine (h)


                 4000 -



         S y. 3000 -
         § <D




         al ioo°-
         (C C




                                                                                                1
                                    Tme (h)                                                Time (h)
                                Present System                                       Improved Sytem


       Fig. 14. Effectiveness of improvements (pipe-workroom, leakage rate: lOt/h)
                                              (without nitrogen release).

                           Start of Na Drain                                 Start of Na Dram
                                  Rush of Dran(Leakage Stop)        B 80 -
                                                                                    Fresh of Na Dran(Leakage Stop)

                 £   60-




                 ^   20-


                                                                                7     7

                                        Tme    (h)                                             Tme (h)




                                                                               NeighbormgRoom
                                                                                                    ,*-•
                                                                                                    CombstionRoom



                                        Time (h)                                               Tme (h)
                                  Present System                                      Improved Sytem


        Fig. 15. Effectiveness of improvements (pipework room, leakage rate: 119 t/h)
                                   (without nitrogen release).


                                                                                                                     55
6. CONCLUSION

      On December 8 1995, the sodium leakage from the secondary circuit occurred at Monju. The
secondary sodium leaked through a temperature sensor, due to the breakaway of the tip of the
thermocouple well. The reactor remained cooled and the safety of the reactor was secured. There
were no adverse effects for operating personnel or the surrounding environment. The cause of the
thermocouple well tube failure resulted from high cycle fatigue due to flow induced vibrations. It was
found that this flow induced vibrations were not caused by well-known Von Karman vortex shedding,
but asymmetric vortex shedding. The original design of the thermocouple well was reviewed. Anew
design guide against the flow-induced vibration was prepared by JNC. According to this design guide,
the modified thermocouple wells were proposed.
      The comprehensive safety review was completed in March 1998. It has been demonstrated
that the following improvements are effective against the sodium leakage incidents and enhance the
safety and reliability of the plant.
    (1) As prevention of sodium leakage,
        - A new design guide against the flow-induced vibration was prepared
        - secondary circuit thermocouple wells will be replaced.
     (2) As detection of sodium leakage at an early stage,
        - Sodium fire sensors will be increased in number and diversified method,
        - Integrated sodium leakage monitoring system will be introduced.
     (3) As reduction of the quantity of sodium leakage,
        - The drain system will be remolded.
     (4) As limiting the diffusion of sodium aerosol and the combustion of spilt sodium,
        - Ventilation system will be shut down automatically,
        - Secondary circuit area will be divided into four smaller zones,
        - Nitrogen gas injection system will be introduced,
        - Thermal insulation for walls and ceilings will be introduced.


                                           REFERENCES

     (1) PNC, the safety review report, 1997 (in Japanese).
     (2) Suzuki, T. et al., 1996, "Monju Secondary Heat Transport System Sodium Leak",
        Proceeding of 1 0th Pacific Basin Nuclear Conference, Kobe, Japan.
     (3) Dozaki, K. et al., 1998, "Modification and Design Guide of Thermocouple well for FBR",
         Proceeding of PVP-Vol.363, Flow-Induced Vibration and Transient Thermal-Hydraulic
         ASME 1998, San Diego, California, USA.
     (4) Ibaki, S.et al., 1998, "Current Statusofthe Prototype FBRMonju", Workshop on "The
         Future of Fast Neutron Reactor", ENS 1998, Nice, France.




56
                                                                                        XA0056253
         SPX SIGNIFICANT EVENTS AND WHETHER IT
         WOULD HAVE HAPPENED ON EFR

         L. RAHMANI
         EDR, Centre Lyonnais d'lngenierie

         S. DECHELETTE
         Villeurbanne, Cedex

         C. BANDINI
         Framatome-Novatome, Lyon

         France

         Abstract

In the 13 years since commissioning of the Creys-Malville nuclear power plant, exactly 100 unusual
events were recorded on the French and later on the INES scales. The resultant ratio is slightly
lower than the French PWR average. This is a noteworthy accomplishment, considering that the
plant is a prototype, went through significant design changes, was repeatedly put to test in operating
transients and, in addition, holds roughly twice the number of components as a PWR of comparable
power. It may be inferred that fast reactors are not more difficult to operate than PWRs, which is
also the opinion of most people having taken shifts in both types of reactors. Although Superphenix
was labelled a white elephant by public opinion makers, this little known characteristic should
remain part of its legacy.
In this period 7 events are registered at the level 1 of the French and INES scales, owing either to
misconception, material or operational failure. At the level 2 of the scales, 2 events are registered,
which is admittedly quite high. The first one was the sodium leakage from and pervasive cracking
of the revolving "drum" of the fiiel handling line, in retrospect the result of the choice of steel grade
not fully compatible with sodium, which questions the designer's decision making process. The
second level 2 event started as a massive air ingress in the primary circuit atmosphere, bringing on a
pollution of the sodium up to 15,5 ppm of oxygen (although its significance in terms of corrosion
was shown to be minimal). Although this event originated from a maintenance mix-up, it revealed a
lack in understanding of sodium chemistry and the inadequacy of the instrumentation.
The operational feed-back of the Superphenix reactor was thoroughly combed for clues to potential
anomalies by a working group comprising representatives of the operator, utility, designer and R&D
bodies. All the gathered information (together with experience gained from other FBRs, most
notably PFR and Phenix) was then analysed in periodic project reviews validating the European
Fast Reactor project, mainly in the areas specific to FBR technology (referring to Superphenix1
second level 2 event, it led to the addition of a gas analyser). That feed-back process, with
complementary contributions and mutual checks of designer teams of various backgrounds, allows
an optimistic view of EFR's seaworthiness.

  Introduction

Between the start of fuel loading in July 1985 and the start of definitive shutdown operations in July
1998, the Superphenix reactor which powers the Creys-Malville NPP has been effected by 101
anomalies and incidents. These events are analysed based on different characteristic criteria. In
particular, we noted:

•      the period during which the event occurred, notably in order to highlight the role of the start-
up period and to distinguish between operation and shutdown periods,


                                                                                                      57
•          the method of detecting the original event, in particular to highlight latent anomalies,

•       the safety function affected by the event, together with deterioration or otherwise of this
function,

•      the original causes of the event to notably differentiate between human and material causes,
but also to separate the events due to design or construction errors from those due to reactor
operation errors,

•          the importance of the event as graded on the international nuclear event scale (INES).

The main results of this examination are described below and a few graphs given. The events are
then listed following a thematic classification.

Lastly those events which are specific to the LMFR technology are again considered from the angle
of the concepts retained for the European Fast Reactor (EFR).



1.         HISTORICAL TREND
The         figure     below       gives    the     breakdown       of     significant     events       over
time.
     100   12           3 4 5 6 7 _ _ _ _ _ _ 8                           9 10 11 12             13 _
     90
     80
     70
     60
     50
     40
     30
     20
     10




                               o



The main periods of reactor operation are as follows:

!•     second half of 1985: reactor loading, first criticality and zero power tests. This period runs
from 19 July 1985 (start of reactor loading with fuel assemblies) to 14 January 1986 (first
connection to the grid),


2»     first half of 1987, limited to 25 May 1987 (reactor shutdown following on from a fuel
storage drum incident): tests on build up to nominal power,

3«         May 1987 to March 1988 : reactor shutdown as a result of the drum incident (no.40)

4«       March 1988 to April 1989 : reactor shutdown during the administrative procedures prior to
restart,

5»         April 1989 to July 1990 : operation,

6»     25 June 1900 to March 1991 : reactor shutdown following primary sodium pollution
(incident 61),


58
7«    March 1991 to July 1992 : works intended to reinforce the reactor defence against sprayed
sodium fires, and administrative procedures prior to restart,
8«        July 1992 to August 1994 : public inquiry into restarting by government decision

9»        August 1994 to December 1994 : operation

10»     December 1994 to September 1995 : reactor shutdown following on from an argon leak from
an intermediate exchanger bell (event not in declaration criteria and described in annex 1)

11 •      September 1995 : administrative procedures prior to restart

12*       September 1995 to 24 December 1996 : reactor operation

13»    since 24 December 1996 : reactor scheduled shutdown followed by legal cancellation of its
operation licence followed by definitive decision to shut down the reactor by the government.



The frequency of the events was 7.8 per year over the entire period considered. In this respect three
periods can be identified :

     > loading, first criticality and zero power testing of the reactor, reactor power build up testing
       and start of the drum shutdown until August 1987, during which there were 48 events, i.e. an
       annual average of 24 per year. Although this figure is high, it can be explained by the
       discovery of a certain number of design and construction anomalies on start-up testing, and by
       installation take-over,

     > long reactor shutdown periods as a result of the drum leak (no.40), pollution of the primary
       sodium (no. 61), argon leak on an intermediate exchanger and cancellation of the decree
       authorising operation : 36 events can be listed on these shutdown periods which total 7.75
       years, i.e. 4.6 events per year.

     > operation of the reactor during the periods noted 5 - 9 - 12 on the figure above : 16 events
       over a total of 36 months, i.e. on average 5.3 events per year.

It is noted that the overall frequency of the events is similar to that observed on the PWR reactors,
i.e. around 8 events declared per year, covering all units after commercial start-up. It is remarkably
low after the initial period of start-up and take-over of the installation, whether in the period of
shutdown or operation.

2.        DETECTION METHOD



     60
            * Quickly detected
     50
            • Detected during tests                        **
     40     A Latent f allures




                                                                                                     59
60% of the anomalies were detected quickly. These were equipment or operating anomalies the
consequences of which were felt in the short term, notably by emergency shutdowns, start-up of
safeguard systems', control rod lowering. These anomalies continued to appear at a regular
frequency until the end of the period considered.



24% of the anomalies were detected on routine inspections : essentially detected during periodic
tests (of which it is one of the aims). This detection method was only effective during the first years
of operation.



16% of anomalies, of various degrees of seriousness, were discovered by accident or due to their
long-term consequences. They are therefore worth more detailed examination:

        no.5 : encountered on account of an inadvertent signal due to incorrect setting of a threshold.
The anomaly discovered is the absence of counting systems for detecting fuel element cladding
failures on one of the two reactor protection channels;

        no. 12 : shutdown without inertia of the two reactor coolant pumps as a result of a loss of one
of the two external power supply lines: this incident revealed a common mode defect on the 4
reactor coolant pumps resulting from a design fault in their control system after a first modification
was carried out;

        no.40 : sodium leak from the fuel assembly storage drum ; this fault was compounded by not
taking into account the alarms in the control room and involves the unnoticed development of a vast
network of cracks in a liquid sodium tank;

        no.42 : error in calculating and setting the radioactivity thresholds leading to dome
isolation ;

       no.43 : break of sodium-air fan blades discovered by a visitor, which might have however
been noted during a routine test;

      no.44 : inoperability of the automatic standby diesel on a safety-related switchboard due to
opening of a manually operated circuit-breaker and non-indication of the signal;

       no.57 : multiple failures of the feedwater sodium loop drainage valve positioning systems
(generic fault);

       no.59 : absence of a system of auto-blocking support on the residual heat evacuation sodium
circuit: the contractor although aware of the anomaly had not declared it;

       no.61 : air intake into the sodium circuit as a result of an error in the maintenance
procedures : the incident also highlighted the absence of means for checking the purity of the circuit
cover argon;

        no.64 : uncontrolled discharge of slightly irradiated metal waste : the normal inspections did
not detect their presence at the site exit;

       no.77 : inoperability of automatic standby by one of the two diesels on a train due to a
maintenance error on the electrical batteries;


1
    decay heat removal, reactor confinement, diesel generators



60
        no 80 : inoperability of the sodium leak detection alarms in the components submerged in
the reactor coolant system due to erroneous determination of the signalling thresholds;

       no 83 : inoperability of the sodium leak detection on a feedwater loop storage tank due to
inaccurate transmission of data between workers;

      no.89 : definitive loss of a sealed radioactive source (1 uCi) used to monitor the accesses,
thrown into a workshop bin by a repairer who was unaware of its nature;

        no.92 : melt of the liquid metal seal on a rotating plug with the reactor critical due to an error
on the operation sheet;

       no.97 : inoperability of the sodium leak detection on several sections of a feedwater sodium
loop auxiliary circuit due to an error in an operating procedure.

In all, seven of these events involve a design error, three an erection or equipment adjustment defect
and eleven indicated faults in the plant operation organisation.




3.     SAFETY FUNCTIONS INVOLVED IN THE EVENTS

3.1 Functions generally involved

The events are here classified according whether they concern the fuel, radioactivity control,
residual heat evacuation, emergency electricity supplies, confinement, control of nuclear material or
other functions. In this paper we will first of all examine only the functions involved even if the
event does not indicate any deterioration of this function.

We observe that almost two thirds of the anomalies involve the reactivity control function
(command of control rod positions), the containment (notably dome isolation and reactor building
ventilation) and standby supplies (diesel generator sets, batteries and switchboards that they
supply). The anomalies concerning sodium only involve eight events




                                     other          fuel 4
                                  functions 14                sodium 8


                      decay heat
                      removal 8

                                                                         stand-by
                      nuclear                                            power 19
                     material 2




                        reactivity 24

                                                               confinement
                                                                    21



                                                                                                       61
3.2 Impaired functions

If we exclude a half (51) of events which have not led to a deterioration (real or potential) of a
reactor safety function, it becomes obvious that the largest number of really significant anomalies is,
like on other installations, associated with the loss of standby electricity supply (which did not have
important consequences for Superphenix since there are 4 identical sets), but also that the second
cause of safety function deterioration is linked to sodium. This illustrates that the two, sodium-
related, incidents which were classified level 2 on the INES scale (nos. 40 and 61) were not isolated
events.
                                                     reactivityfuel
                                        sodium
                                          16%




                          confinement
                              12%




                                 decay heat
                                  removal
                                    14%




Note : in this paper we have covered deterioration of a safety function and not the consequences for
safety : in general, for a deterioration of a safety function to impact the safety of the installation, this
function must also be required. If we adopted this criterion, the relative importance of the anomalies
associated with the sodium and its cover gas would further increase since these must be
permanently confined owing to :

        - their contribution to the transport of fission and activation, volatile or gaseous, products;

        - the risks they engender (sodium fires, anoxia).

3.3 Absence of a safety function degradation

In more than half the events declared, no reactor safety function was degraded. This category
includes:

     inadvertent emergency shutdowns, dome isolation, ventilation configuration of the reactor in the
     reinforced confinement position,

     lowering of control rods,

     three cases of non-compliance with procedures for checking the protection functions,

     three events involving fuel handling,

-    two events involving uncontrolled exit of radioactive matter involving a very small amount of
     activity,

-    two cases of human errors making the equipment assuring a safety function inoperable without
     operator action,

     one case of inadvertent start up of a residual heat evacuation circuit.


62
This large number of events non-directly significant for reactor safety could lead to the conclusion
that the criteria which cover the declaration of significant events are excessively strict. However,
these events reveal problems of the plant operation organisation.

3.4 Construction defects without a direct impact on safety

Event no.63 would not be included in the list of those associated with a loss of a safety function if
its initiator (collapse of a part of the turbine hall roof under snow weight) had not caused a long loss
of one of the external electrical sources.

The argon leak from an intermediate exchanger bell, an event which was outside declaration
criteria, caused 8 months' shutdown.

These two events are directly linked to malpractices, undetected through the quality assurance
system. The management structure chosen for building the plant (mainly in the view of distributing
the contracts between participant countries) rendered the quality control probably more difficult. It
should be noted yet that, as a whole, building deficiencies contribute only marginally to the number
of significant events.


4.     CAUSES

The causes have been listed according to their origin as follows :

       installation design,

       installation construction,

       execution of start-up tests,

       modifications executed since start-up,

       methods associated with normal operation of the installation,

       equipment failure,

       human errors during execution of a task.

The following graph gives the global percentages, while the table indicates, for each given period,
the annual frequency of events.


                                                              commissioning
                                                                     tests
                                       human error                    8%
                                          15%




                              design                                                operation
                               15%                                                 procedures
                                                                                      33%




                              equipment failure
                                    20%                             construction
                                                     modification
                                                                        6%
                                                        3%


                                                                                                      63
                             wan 3
  Period
  (operation shaded)


  Equipment
                         1


                         6    5.3    0
                                           4


                                          2.2   1.3
                                                       6


                                                       1.3
                                                              7


                                                             1.5
                                                                    0




                                                                   1.8
                                                                         m3
                                                                               10


                                                                                0
                                                                                      11


                                                                                      0
                                                                                           i0
                                                                                                  13


                                                                                                   0

  Design                 8    3.8   1.2   1.1 2.5      0     0.8   0.9    0     0     0      0     0

  Construction           4    0.8    0     0    2.5    1.3    0     0     0     0     0      0     0

  Commissioning          2    3.8 2.4      0     0     0      0     0     0     0     0      0     0

  Modification          4      0     0     0      0    0      0    0.9    0     0     0      0     0

  Operation              8    2.3   3.6   2.2    1.3   1.3   5.3   3.4    3    2.7    0     3.2   1.7

  Human error            4     3     0     0     1.3    0    0.8   0.9    3     0     0     0.8   3.4



This classification is partly subjective since in most cases there is not a single cause of the incident.
Nevertheless, out of all the events occurring at Creys-Malville, the following trends can be
identified:

        Events attributed to the design, the construction of the installation, and its commissioning
are preponderant at the start of the plant life, but only represent 29% of the total. The phase of
installation take-over has therefore correctly fulfilled its role.

       Equipment failures and human errors together caused one third of the events. Although
precautions (as a matter of quality assurance) can be taken in this respect (selection of equipment,
preventive maintenance, training, preparation for works, etc.), these two types of events are
nevertheless difficult to avert totally.

        The definition of modifications on the equipment brought about 3 events:

  • no.4 : deformation of a new fuel assembly (before loading): the modification executed as a
  result of incident no.l (addition of a pointer to the biological protection hood for new fuel sub-
  assemblies) have caused this incident,

  • no. 12 : no-inertia coast-down of reactor coolant pumps : a modification to avoid the alternator
  supplying their power operating in motor mode had been previously implemented on the four
  drive sets by using information supplied by a non-emergency supplied electrical source,

   • no.80 : inoperability of the sodium leak protection alarms in the gas spaces : the thresholds
   validating the alarms had been set erroneously by the team responsible for designing the
   modification and the error was detected thanks to the critical observations of an operator.

   The increasingly strict approach to the management of modifications has, since 1994, avoided
   such events recurring in spite of the many modifications made.

        Lastly, 33% of events can be attributed to the methods or the usual organisation of the
reactor operating staff, including maintenance. Out of these, 7 occurred during reactor shutdown for
purification of the sodium. However, there is no apparent correlation with the reactor status.

These events, which are not, generally, specific to the Fast Reactors technology, could be reduced in
frequency thank to the progress made in matters of man-machine interface and equipment
testability.


64
5.     SCALE OF SERIOUSNESS

All the significant events occurring on Creys-Malville have been classified using the criteria on the
INES scale of nuclear events. It must be observed that for events occurring prior to application of
the French scale, the subsequent classification cannot take account of the discussions which have
taken place in certain limit cases. However, this classification benefits from all the experimental
classification work which had been carried out by IPSN and EOF when defining the French scale.

The following 2 incidents characteristic of the fast reactors are classified level 2:

- sodium storage drum leak (no.40)

- reactor coolant system pollution (no.61).

These two incidents fully reflect the prototype nature of the installation.

The following six events are classified level 1:

        no. 12 : emergency shutdown with loss of inertia on two reactor coolant pumps

       no. 18 : heating of a fuel assembly,

       no.56 : fall of a temporary lifting crane,

       no.63 : collapse of the train A turbine hall roof,

        no.88 : simultaneous opening of several containment barriers,

        no.92 : fusion of the liquefiable metal seal on the large rotating plug, reactor critical.

Three of these events are associated with erection of the installations, the other three with operation.

The analysis of these 8 events according to the criteria examined previously are given in the
following table.

It will be observed that none of these events did endanger reactor safety. On the other hand one
(no.40) definitely compromised any hope to cover the plant operating costs, for the repair could not
restore hot irradiated fuel storage capacity and compelled the operator thereafter to wait for the
decay power to subside before unloading the core, meaning long outages.

Four events brought about long idling periods (nos 40, 61, 63 and the leak of the intermediate heat
exchanger bell) and contributed to alienate decisive sectors of opinion, including in the nuclear
field.

The description of these eight events is attached in the annex 1.




                                                                                                       65
     NO   PERIOD           DETECTION              SAFETY FUNCTION                      CAUSE

     40        2                 late              sodium confinement                  design

     61        5                 late               cover gas integrity                design

     12        1                 late                  core cooling                  modification

     18        2        commissioning test             core cooling                   operation

     56        5           equipment test                   none                     construction

     63        6           instantaneous                    none                     construction

     88        10          instantaneous            reactor confinement               operation

     92       12                 late               reactor confinement               operation




The two incidents (nos.40 and 61) which originated in a design failure have been taken into account
in the EFR project as follows:

      By the choice of material used for vessels (which implies that a thorough explanation has to be
      given to incident 41, including its reproduction in laboratory conditions), by anchoring the
      safety vessel in the vessel pit, itself constructed in sodium-refractory concrete,

      By permanent inspections of the chemical composition of the gas cover.


6.        GROUPING OF THE SIGNIFICANT EVENTS

The significant events occurred at Creys-Malville can be grouped in coherent families, each incident
being referred to only once according to its most important criterion.

a-      Justified implementing of a safeguard system (residual heat evacuation circuits, dome
isolation, diesel generator sets)

          no.6 : destruction of a feeder circuit breaker to the 6.6 kV switchboard

          no.54 : voltage loss a 6.6 kV switchboard

          no.63 : collapse of the turbine hall roof, train A

          no.81 : loss of external electricity supplies to train B

          no.93 : tripping of stage 1 dome isolation

In the first four cases this involved start-up of one or two generator sets.



b-        Sodium leak

          no.40 : sodium storage drum leak


66
       no.60 : sodium leak on a feedwater loop auxiliary circuit tee junction

       no.65 : sodium leak on the plugging indicator of a residual heat evacuation circuit

This type of incident is specific to fast reactors and justifies them being placed in a separate
category. It will be observed that the risk involved in sodium fires motivated the regulating
authority to demand, specifically after the Almeria accident, that a sprayed sodium fire resulting
from a complete and sudden rupture of a main secondary pipe be taken account of.



c-    Physical phenomena leading to reactor shutdown (emergency or intentional
shutdown):

       no. 18 : fuel assembly overheating

       no.24 : emergency shutdown due to temperature fluctuations

       no.55 : emergency shutdown due to reactor coolant pump stop

       no.61 : reactor coolant pollution

       no.79 : failure of a reactor coolant pump coupling



d-      Failure of the reactor protection system (bringing into question its operation when
solicited)

       no.2 : non-lowering of three complementary shutdown system rods

       no.5 : absence of train B cladding break detection channels

       no.62 and no.69: no-voltage relay anomalies

The two first events are associated with the reactor start-up tests. However, the two last ones,
although they initiated an emergency shut-down thank to the "fail-safe" design of the reactor
protection system, present the problem of its reliability.



e-     Failure of another safety function (evacuation of residual heat, containment)

       no.9, no.26 and no.46: diesel generator sets heating

       no. 12 : non-inertia shutdown of reactor coolant pump

       no. 13 : non-coupling of a pair of diesel generator sets

       no. 15 and no.42: poor adjustment of the dome activity threshold

       no.36, no.47 and no.50: loss of battery capacity

       no.37 : no-voltage on 6.6 kV standby switchboard
       no.43 : break of sodium-air exchanger fan blades

       no.44 : voltage loss on emergency-supplied 6.6 kV switchboard

                                                                                                 67
          no.49 : non-start-up of a diesel generator

          no.53 : non-closure of a steam generator water valve

          no.57 : anomalies on feedwater loop drainage valve

          no.59 : absence of a self-blocking support on a residual heat evacuation circuit

          no.67 : inoperability of a sodium-air exchanger

          no.68 : inoperability of a diesel generator

          no.71 : loss of train B standby raw water circuit

          no.73 : inoperability of a diesel generator

          no.77 : inoperability of two diesel generators on one train

          no.80 : inoperability of sodium leak detection alarms in gas spaces immersed in the primary
sodium

          no.82 : through crack on the balancing line of secondary loop rupture discs

          no.83 : inoperability of sodium leak detection on the storage tanks

          no.84 : inoperability of a residual heat evacuation system

          no.87 : inoperability of a secondary loop argon sweeping circuit

          no.88 : simultaneous opening of several containment barriers

          no.92 : liquefiable metal seal fusion on large rotating plug

          no.94 : loss of intermediate containment integrity by gas activity control circuit

          no.95 : inoperability of diesel set

          no.96 : inoperability of chilled water production system

          no.97: inoperability of sodium leak detection on 8 sections of a secondary loop auxiliary
circuit

          no. 98 : loss of slab cooling

          no. 100 : shutdown of reactor coolant pump

These events are significant of potential or effective deterioration of a safety function (evacuation of
power in most cases).




f-        Events concerning handling (of assemblies or components)

          no.l : drop of a new fuel assembly into its pit

          no.4 : deformation of a new fuel assembly


68
          no.25 : break of an observation window on the small cask

          no.56 : fall of a temporary lifting crane

The separation of the installation into two parts, reactor and handling, together with the specificities
of this type of events, allows this category, which is relatively diverse as to the events it covers, to
be defined.

g-     Emergency shutdown orders or inadvertent rod lowering (without anomaly on the
reactor protection system):

          no. 7 : shutdown by the power/reactor coolant flow protection

       no.8 and no. 11 : emergency shutdown tripped by the train B cladding break detection
channel

          no. 10 : inadvertent manual emergency shutdown

          no. 14 : emergency shutdown tripped by the seismic channels

          no. 16 and no. 17 : emergency shutdown tripped during works on the reactor protection
system

          no. 19 : lowering of a control rod

          no.20 : lowering of 3 rods on the diverse shutdown system by permanent supply cut off

          no.21 : lowering of 3 rods of the diverse shutdown system during a fast shutdown

          no.22 : emergency shutdown by the neutronic measurement channels after a fast shutdown

          no.23 : lowering of 2 control rods

      no.27: emergency shutdown by non-inhibition of the neutronic power low level
measurement channels

       no.28 : emergency shutdown by the neutronic measurement channels on movement of a
physical sensor in the core

          no.29, no. 30 and no.32 : lowering of one or two diverse shutdown system rods

          no .33 : emergency shutdown by the neutronic measurement channel after a fast shutdown

          no.34 : lowering of no.2 main control system control rods

          no.39 : emergency shutdown order by the power/reactor coolant flow protection

          no.41 : emergency shutdown due to works on the computer monitoring the heating of train B
reactor

        no.51 and no.52: emergency shutdown due to a fault on a power/reactor coolant flow
protection

          no.85: emergency shutdown without initiator

Generally, these events translate faults on materials or organisation design (man-machine interface)
but do not have physical consequences for installation safety.


                                                                                                       69
h-     Inadvertent start-up of a safeguard system :

      no.31, no.35, no.38 and 45: dome 2nd stage isolation

       no .48 : dome 2nd stage isolation

       no. 5 8 : dome 1st stage isolation

       no.66 : inadvertent start-up of a residual heat evacuation circuit

       no.70 and no.72 : dome 1st stage isolation

       no.74 : dome 2nd stage isolation

       no.75 : dome 2" stage isolation

       no.76 : dome 1st stage isolation

       no.78 : dome 2n stage isolation

       no.99 : excessive pressure drop inside the reactor building

Same comment as for the previous category.



i-     Non-compliance with procedures (tests guaranteeing correct operation of systems
associated with reactor safety)

       no.3 : incorrect estimate of the critical mass

       no.86 : non-execution of control rod translation force measurements

       no.90 : operation of 2 control rods without recording the translation force

       no.91 : non-compliance with the delays for executing periodic tests of fire detection



j-     fault in the management of nuclear matter

       no.64 : uncontrolled discharge of slightly irradiated steel

       no.89 : definitive loss of a sealed 1 uCi radioactive source



7      SIGNIFICANCE OF EVENTS FOR THE FAST REACTOR TECHNOLOGY
Out of 101 events considered (including the intermediate exchanger bell argon leak) :

       66 can be considered non-specific to fast reactors, i.e :

        in view of their causes (but not necessarily their effects), they could have occurred on PWR
reactors,




70
       they can be prevented by improving the quality approach in terms of the design or
procedures and/or by generalising the recent approaches relative to the design of control and
instrumentation systems and the man/machine interface (testability, ergonomics).

In particular, they consist of faults on the electrical supply, diesel generators and batteries, faults on
electrical connections, routing errors, in-service works or calibration errors.

One could be tempted to mitigate this favourable observation (2/3 of events are not specific to fast
reactors) by the fact that the number of components is twice more and that certain circuits are more
complex (primary and secondary gas circuits) as compared to PWRs.

The overall results do not however confirm this reservation which would imply that, for an
equivalent design (control and instrumentation, man/machine interface), the probability of failure
should be identical for individual components and thus roughly double for all the systems and
functions.

This is probably due to the fact that, apart from the control of reactivity and the protection of the
steam generators, the accidental transients on fast reactors are much slower than those on the PWRs
and that there are therefore fewer systems and actuators requiring both very fast and very reliable
start-up.


      35 can be considered specific to the fast reactors. Among these a distinction must be
made between :

        18 SPX specific events which correspond to :

                steps not adopted for EFR (biological protection bell, dome, intermediate exchangers
bell, ensuring leaktightness between hot and cold headers),

               procedures improved and validated on SPX (e.g. lowering of clusters before
changeover to auxiliary motor) : these procedures must obviously be retained or adapted for future
fast reactors.



        17 "SPX & EFR generic events" (see annex 2) which correspond to :

        non-quality of the equipment or fabrication:

               plug left in an assembly leg,

               fan blade break,

               primary pump coupling break,



        system (control and instrumentation) or component design improved then validated on SPX :

               reactor coolant pump control and instrumentation,

               cask observation window design,

               control and instrumentation on the fast decompression isolation sequence,

               design of plugging indicators preheating,

                                                                                                         71
      points on which studies are required :

              measurement of the primary flow and tripping of associated protections (2 events).

              reactor measurement sensitivity to cable impact due to very currents (2 emergency
shutdowns by the train B cladding break detection channel),

              fluctuation of the temperature at the sub-assembly outlets (first fertile row),



       generic technological aspects :

              design of a main vessel (storage drum),

              conditions of hot sodium/cold sodium mixture,

              checking of the primary sodium impurity level,

              design of dead legs subject to sodium aerosols

              design of the cover gas circuit.


8      THE PROJECT REVIEWS OF THE MAIN SYSTEMS OF THE FBR TECHNOLOGY BASED ON
       OPERATING FEEDBACK

Since 1995, a systematic approach to check the design of the EFR systems has been carried out in
the framework of the Project Reviews of the main systems and components based on operating
feedback.

These PR have concerned :
     - Control rod drive mechanisms
      - Main sodium pumps (primary and secondary)
      - Intermediate heat exchangers
      - Primary sodium auxiliary systems
      - Primary argon auxiliary systems
      - Sodium circuits
      - Steam generators

Each PR has been organised practically in the same way, as follows :
       - Introduction, including design specifications and safety requirements of the systems
surveyed.
       - A survey of the characteristics of the process fluids (if appropriate).
      - A comparison between EFR design and the existing (or having existed) designs : mainly
PFR, PX, SPX.
       - Recommendations, proposals for EFR (and future) design.
       - Conclusions.
In order to prepare each PR, certain specific studies have been carried out:
       - Comparison of EFR design to existing designs.

72
       - Operating feedback of the same or similar systems from plants in operation (or having been
operated).
       - Main characteristics and the main feedback of the process fluids.
Each PR has given rise to a synthesis. Hereafter are indicated only those of the conclusions which
derived from the feed-back of Superphenix.

PR on control rod drive mechanisms

       DSD mechanisms

These mechanisms are mainly derived from the Superphenix DSD mechanisms, so it has to
accommodate the results of in-service inspection and maintenance works on the DSD mechanisms
and the DSD absorber rods at Superphenix.


PR on Intermediate Heat Exchangers

The conclusions are mainly that EFR intermediate heat exchangers design globally integrates
features from Superphenix intermediate heat exchangers, the design of which already benefits from
experience gained at Phenix.


PR on primary sodium auxiliary systems
Concerning the "principle design sheet", there are no particular remarks from the operating
feedback : integrated electro-magnetic pumps at Superphenix are reliable; an external circuit makes
maintenance operations easy.

Adding to the system an integrated plugging meter, improved and optimised as regard to the
Superphenix one (200 1/h instead of 50 1/h), might be considered.
This way the two main functions of oxygen content measurement and cold trapping will be
independent.


PR on primary argon auxiliary systems

Operating feedback suggests having the working pressure range for the circuit as low as possible.
This is easily attempted with a so-called constant pressure circuit (such as Phenix and Superphenix).
There is also a concern to limit the sodium leak hazards from the reactor upper closure by geyser
effect; it needs a low argon cover gas pressure. Moreover, it must be possible to lower the relative
pressure of the cover gas circuit near zero, especially during refuelling and maintenance and
primary components handling, in order to avoid (or to substantially limit) argon leaks to the outside.

Hence it has been suggested that the EFR argon reactor cover gas circuit design return to a (almost)
constant pressure circuit, bringing benefits from operating feedback.


PR on sodium circuits (secondary, auxiliary, decay heat removal)

Phenix and Superphenix secondary circuit designs are simple; filling and draining are easy.
Moreover, at Phenix, most of nozzles of small piping have been eliminated from secondary pipe-
work during renovation works. It follows that the need to have a high point vessel, and a degassing
circuit (as actually in design) has to be considered.



                                                                                                    73
In the current EFR design, the slope of the secondary piping is towards the intermediate heat
exchangers. This arrangement, which does not allow complete draining of secondary circuits at
intermediate heat exchangers, must be avoided (slope to intermediate heat exchangers for the cold
leg and from the intermediate heat exchangers for the hot leg as at Phenix and at Superphenix).

Based on French operating experience and usual operating procedures, it has been suggested that the
main sodium pumps of EFR Consistent Design be equipped with pony motors in order to assure
sodium forced convection in secondary circuits in any configuration.

As the main pollutant of the secondary circuit is hydrogen, the secondary auxiliary circuits have to
be optimised in order to measure hydrogen contents and in order to trap hydrides; it would be useful
to have data about tritium diffusion from the primary circuit.


PR on steam generators

From the operating feedback from British, French and Russian steam generators which have
equipped sodium-cooled fast reactors, it can be confirmed that it is possible to manufacture and to
operate large and reliable 'integral once through' steam generators without major difficulties, and
respecting high Quality Assurance rules.

The helical steam generator design can be considered favourably based on the Superphenix
operating feedback,

The selection of a helical steam generator as a fallback option for EFR is therefore fully justified .


9.      CONCLUSION
The frequency of the significant events which occurred in the Creys-Malville facility (with the
Superphenix reactor), equal to 7.8 per year for the entire period considered including the start-up
period - i.e. 6.8 per year when only considering the period subsequent to first coupling to the grid
(1986), is similar to the one recorded for the PWR reactors which is about 8 per unit and per year.

Around half the significant events had no consequence, whether effective or potential, for reactor
safety.

On the other hand, it is observed that in 16% of the events, the installation was in a degraded
condition without the operator noticing this. It may be noted that seven of these events occurred
after June 1990, date of the air ingress detected late in the primary circuit, i.e. around 1 per year or
18% of the events occurring during this period.

48% of the events can be attributed to an imperfect man-machine interface, to the methods, usual
organisation of reactor operation or human failures. These factors represent all the causes of events
occurring during the last three years, notably the period of continuous operation of the reactor in
1996.

It is observed that the significant events which involved the electricity supply are in a majority. This
observation underlines the importance which has to be attached to the integrity of the electricity
supplies.

Lastly, the events associated with the presence of sodium are the second largest category (16%)
among those which affect the safety functions and the largest in the length of resulting plant idling
and in seriousness (two events classified level 2 on the INES scale). This means that contrary to the
opinion commonly held during reactor design, the fast reactor technology was not totally mastered.


 74
If one adopts the point of view of future fast reactors, particularly the EFR project studies, the
analysis shows that, out of 101 events :

       66 may be considered as "non-LMFR specific" i.e.

               from their causes they might as well happen on PWRs;

             they can be prevented by a strengthened approach of quality assurance in design or
procedures and/or by an extensive use of recent concepts relative to instrumentation and control
systems and man-machine interface (testability, ergonomics).

      18 events correspond to specific Superphenix features not retained for EFR, or to procedures
improved since the event occurred.

       17 "generic" events correspond either to designs (of systems, equipment) which may have be
improved and validated on Superphenix, or to special technical notions, a few of which still require
some development.

A systematic review of the operation of Superphenix allowed to validate several concepts which
were then retained for the EFR project in the most characteristic fields of liquid metal circuit
technology: control rods, pumps, intermediate exchangers, sodium and argon auxiliaries, sodium
circuits and steam generators.

The experience of Superphenix thus furthered the technical quality of the next fast reactor
generation.




                                                                                                  75
                             Annex I

DESCRIPTION OF EVENTS CLASSIFIED LEVELS 1 AND 2 ON THE INES SCALE
                         FOLLOWED BY'
     DESCRIPTION OF THE ARGON LEAK FROM AN INTERMEDIATE
                       EXCHANGER BELL




                                                               77
     EMERGENCY SHUTDOWN TRIPPED BY LOSS OF 225 KV AUXILIARY POWER



No.12   Date 22 November 1985 at 23 00


1-      NATURE OF THE INCIDENT

Emergency shutdown tripped by loss of 225 kV auxiliary power


2-      SEQUENCE OF EVENTS

Reactor was critical at a temperature of 195°C The reactor coolant pumps were operating on the mam motor
on 110 rpm

Train A was supplied by the 400 kV network, the 225 kV auxiliary line was available

Tram B was supplied by the 225 kV auxiliary line, the supply by the 400 kV network being locked out for
maintenance works and elimination of the neutral switch

At 23 00 58, a defect on the 225 kV auxiliary line caused the two circuit breakers on line LGR A and B to
open

At 23 01 03 the mm voltage threshold on the 6 6 kV LGA C and D and LHA C and D switchboards on tram B
was reached tripping emergency shutdown AU2 and start-up of the two tram B diesel generators

Tram A remained supplied normally by the 400 kV system

At 23 01 05, reactor coolant pumps RCP C and D went into reverse rotation as a result of the loss of inertia
This loss of inertia is due to opening of the self-exciting circuit breaker 03 JA of the variable speed alternators
supplying the motors of these two pumps

Secondary pumps BCS C and D were driven by the auxiliary motors

At 23 10, procedures I 14 C and D applicable in the event of loss of non-emergency supplied switchboards
LGA C and D came into force

Closure of the obturators on the two reactor coolant pumps C and D took place at 23 28

At 01 09, dispatching indicated that the 225 kV line would be inoperable at least for the night It was therefore
decided to re-supply tram B as quickly as possible through the 400 kV line {locked out)

The end of lockout of the 400 kV tram B took place at 02 00

The instrumentation and control re-qualification tests for the tram B power evacuation system began at 4 00

Re-energising the 400 kV tram B transformer took place at 07 00

Tram B switchboards were re-supplied from the 400 kV network at 08 00 and the tram B diesels were
stopped


3-      STEPS TAKEN

Application of incident instruction I 14 loss of non-emergency supplied switchboards

Re-supplying in the shortest possible time of the tram B switchboards by the 400 kV system

Drainage of the sodium circuits since preheating function not emergency supplied (MAS 0)

Cancellation of the planned tests (reactor critical) pending the explanation and the elimination of anomalies
having caused pump reverse operation


                                                                                                                 79
On 23 November 1985, a helicopter search was initiated to detect the line fault This fault was due to the
accumulation of frost on the cables (one phase in contact with a tree)


4-      NO-INERTIA STOPPING OF REACTOR PUMP


4.1 -   STATUS OF THE SYSTEM AT THE ORIGIN

Since excitation of the alternators of the pump drive sets, compound type, can be interrupted by circuit
breakers RCP* 03 JA and straps had been installed so that these circuit breakers could open as soon as the
6 6 kV supply of RCP* 01 MO tripped out, the system for progressive coast-down of the primary coolant
pumps was not operational (common mode defect)


4.2 -   FIRST MODIFICATION

Relaying modifications were carried out to overcome the anomalies observed during the tests non-opening
of RCP* 03 JA on loss of voltage, motonsation of the alternator on take-over by the auxiliary motor These
modifications can be summarised as follows

•       installation of a section to take into account "auxiliary motor tripped in", instead of a measurement of
the motor charge current, which is not very reliable due to the small difference between the charge and no-
load currents,

•        to avoid operation of the alternator in motor mode, opening of RCP* 03 JA is controlled by the
following conditions

        RCP* 01 MO mam motor stopped,

        and, either alternator speed less than 45 rpm, or auxiliary motor RCP* 02 MO started

The "mam motor not started" and "alternator speed less than 45 rpm" conditions also open RCP* 01 JA
(which leads to opening of RCP* 03 JA)


4.3 -   INCIDENT

On the incident, RCP* 03 JA opened since the following conditions were met

«      speed less than 45 rpm (threshold was generated from the                     non-emergency     supplied
LKB* switchboard, the threshold being reached by a voltage drop on tram B),

•       RCP* 01 JA open due to voltage drop on LKB*,

•       RCP* 01 MO stopped (no 6 6 kV at switchboard LGAC/ D)


4.4 -   NEW MODIFICATIONS
                i

The insertion of additional relays could reduce reliability Moreover, on a definitive voltage loss on
switchboard LGA, maintaining the excitation contacts closed cannot damage the set In the other
configurations, the risks of alternator operation in motor mode are eliminated by opening RCP* 01 JA through
contacts 02 and 08 XR It was therefore considered preferable to eliminate relay 16 and 17 XR and the relay
contact 20 XR on the start-up channel since the protection of the alternator in terms of the motonsation risks
is provided by RCP* 01 JA Maintaining RCP* 03 JA in a closed position when the pump is at the end of slow
down or in reverse rotation does not present any particular problems On a loss of voltage, the inertia slow
down of the pumps is thus maintained as long as the auxiliary motor is not started




80
               ABNORMAL HEATING OF FUEL SUB-ASSEMBLY COEC 3200



No.18 Date Tuesday 7 January 1986


1-      NATURE OF THE INCIDENT

Since the start of power build up, heating of fuel assembly COEC 3200 situated in the core at position 41/25
was detected clearly above that of the other assemblies and monitored without ever reaching the TRTC
alarm threshold


2-      ANALYSIS

A first examination of the sheets of the inspection carried out at the plant before entering the new sub-
assembly in the handling drum indicated that the loss of air pressure of this sub-assembly is in the high range
of the criterion loss of pressure equal to 16 mbar for an acceptability of 12 ± 5 mbar

An enquiry carried out in parallel with the manufacturer COGEMA showed on 7 January in the evening that a
natural rubber protective plug could have been forgotten in the leg of the assembly

A set of consistent correlations confirmed this hypothesis and showed that this assembly, forming part of the
batch of four prototypes whose legs had been re-machined, was the only one involved


3-      STEPS TAKEN

The reactor was stopped as soon as the results of the COGEMA enquiry were known and the faulty
assembly was discharged to the storage drum

An enquiry into the organisation of the manufacturer's quality was carried out in parallel by the mam
constructor NOVATOME-NIRA and EDF's manufacturing inspection service (SCF)

Chemical analysis of the plug consisting of 98% natural rubber highlighted the presence of a low content of
impurities which, when diluted in the 3500 tonnes of reactor coolant sodium, led to a proportion lower than the
limit permitted for nuclear quality sodium

CEA earned out a series of static sodium tests to study the behaviour of the plug at high temperature

Sub-assembly COEC 3200 was examined before being stored in cask IL 49 until dispatched to the LSAI
laboratory (irradiated assembly monitoring laboratory atMarcoule) in June 1989

The cntena for checking new fuel sub-assemblies before loading by verifying the loss of air pressure were
fine-tuned An endoscopic examination inside the leg has been added


4-      CONCLUSIONS

The investigation by SCF demonstrated that the presence of a plug is only possible on assemblies re-
machined to modify the self-onentating legs CEA concludes from the tests that, at 400°C with sodium,
pyrolysis of the plug is complete and results in the formation of an "amorphous" coke and gas products
Endoscopic examination carried out on 16 and 17 June 1986 confirmed the hypothesis of a forgotten plug
The analysis carried out on the residue samples confirmed this oversight




                                                                                                              81
         SODIUM LEAK IN THE SPACE BETWEEN STORAGE DRUM VESSELS



I.S. No.40

Date 3Apnl1987


1-      NATURE OF THE INCIDENT

•       8 March 1987 leak detection alarm in the space between the storage drum vessels this alarm is not
confirmed locally

•       9 March 1987 reactor pit bottom intermittent leak alarm investigations ongoing

•       31 March 1987 as a result of the investigations, cold nitrogen sampling in the inter-vessel space did
not reveal any traces of sodium Nevertheless, the balances for the sodium levels of the drum and the
storage tank show that there are 20 m3 of sodium between the vessels


2-      IMMEDIATE ANALYSIS

The leak was confirmed and the first investigations to locate the leak were started (leak at level 14 6 m ±
1 m)


3-      IMMEDIATE STEPS

Evacuation of the equipment (new fuel, rods, COEC 3200 irradiated dummy assemblies) was begun as soon
as possible to enable the drum to be emptied

An additional barrier was installed relative to the sodium which could leak from the retention tank and the
mechanical strength of the drum safety tank in the new conditions created by the leak were confirmed

A strategy was developed to define the reactor operating conditions during the period of drum moperability

Partial temporary operation of the APEC (fuel evacuation workshop) for storage of the " steel" assemblies
withdrawn from the storage drum and placed in containers

Storage drum emptying in conditions allowing pre-location of the leak

This took place between 27 August 1987 and 9 September 1987 and enabled the leak to be located (infrared
thermograph, xenon and helium detection in the inter-vessel space)


4-      CAUSES OF THE LEAK

The leak was caused by a horizontal crack around 60 cm long on the lower angle welding bead which
secures a plate This rectangular metal plate welded on the inner face of the mam storage drum vessel
contributes to maintaining the drum sodium cooling circuit

After discharging the assemblies contained in the drum and emptying, in September 1987, the sodium
contained in the drum mam vessel, samples by cutting the metal from the plate which was at the origin of the
leak were taken

The results obtained at the end of 1989, and the laboratory tests and examinations identified the most
probable scenario involving the nature of the drum steel (ferritic 15 D3) and the simultaneous presence of
three factors the existence of start sites (micro-cracking) in zones of high hardness, residual stresses close
to the elastic limit of the material, and lastly, the contributions of hydrogen which allowed the bottling
phenomenon to occur

However the cracking phenomenon could not be re-created in laboratory using specimen of the same steel
grade in similar conditions with the presence of these three factors


82
5-      CONSEQUENCES OF THE INCIDENT

The progress of the incident showed the merits of having a retention vessel around the drum mam vessel to
collect and confine any sodium leak It also highlighted that this step could be improved by additional steps
concerning leak control, monitoring of the integrity of the retention tank and the actions needed in the event of
a leak from the second tank

Processing of the drum incident thus led to similar principles being applied to reactor vessels and reinforced
the procedures to be applied in the case of leaks from the mam vessel by supplementary measures These
measures are contained in procedure U4 "Steps taken to limit the consequences of a hypothetical leak from
the safety tank as a result of a leak from the reactor mam vessel"

After the drum sodium drainage and the first investigations, identical faults to those observed on the plate at
the origin of the leak were found on similar plates The reuse of the initial sodium drum after repair therefore
proved to be impossible and it was necessary to define a replacement

When the drum was removed, it was found out that long (several meters) cracks had also formed in the
constituting weld beads of the mam vessel

Lastly, reflection after the incident underlined the need to proceed to re-examine the design and
manufactunng file for safety-related components in contact with sodium to confirm the absence of zones
which could present the risks of leaks


6-      ADDITIONAL SAFETY ANALYSES CARRIED OUT AS A RESULT OF THE DRUM INCIDENT

The safety analysis carried out as a result of the drum incident covered the causes of the incident its
sequence and its consequences Based on this analysis, additional technical measures were considered
necessary before restarting the reactor These mam measures are as follows

•       setting up the procedures for interventions needed in the event of a reactor mam vessel leak

•     re-examination of the radiographic images taken during the manufacture of safety-related
components (reactor vessels etc ),

•        in situ confirmation using the MIR (reactor inspection machine) robot of the good condition of the
reactor vessel and execution of the first periodic inspections of this vessel


6.1 - PROCEDURE IN THE EVENT OF MAIN REACTOR VESSEL LEAK FOLLOWING A SAFETY
VESSEL LEAK (PROCEDURE U4)

The reactor leak is an event considered extremely improbable and the reactor mam vessel is surrounded by a
second vessel, so-called safety vessel, to collect any leaks

However, although these vessels, which are constructed in stainless steel, are different from those of the
initial fuel storage drum executed in carbon steel grade 15 D3, it was considered necessary to draw all the
conclusions from the drum incident and the measures that had to be taken on the spot Indeed, when a leak
on the first vessel occurs, it is essential to take a certain number of additional steps to measure and control
the leak, preserve the integrity of the second vessel to the maximum and arrange around these two vessels
the means for monitoring the tightness of the second vessel and the steps to limit the consequences of a leak
from it

So-called procedure U4 was established with these aims in mind This enables very different accident
scenarios associated with a mam vessel leak to be dealt with and in this respect breaks down into actions
spread over a period of time

Thus, it is foreseen that in the event of a reactor mam vessel leak

•       the reactor is immediately shut down and cooling begins,

•        steps are taken to overcome the risks of a secondary vessel leak by pumping the sodium which flows
into the inter-vessel space back to the mam vessel this pumping circuit is called the leak recovery circuit and



                                                                                                               83
it can be installed in around 10 or so days, this time being due to the primary sodium reactivity, the parts of
this circuit are stored,

•        sodium containment and cooling of the core in the event that the safety vessel itself were to leak is
guaranteed To this end, the reactor pit is made leak-tight at its penetrations to allow argon blanketing by an
injection sleeve installed permanently, the bottom of the reactor pit is lined with a layer of alumina (Cnstalba)
with suitable granulometry which, on the one hand, absorbs any sodium leak and acts as a blanket regarding
inflammation risks, and on the other completes the leaktightness of the pit bottom The level of sodium in the
main reactor is maintained above the heating part of the assemblies to ensure their cooling, if necessary by
bringing in outside sodium from the SNA tanks or secondary loop (BCS) The residual heat is evacuated
inside the vessel by the BPR cooling systems via the intermediate exchanger or by the RUR, and to the
outside by the RUS circuits, the water of which is replaced by an organic liquid which does not react with the
sodium in the event of a leak The RRI water circuit for cooling the reactor pit concrete is drained

These actions are spread over a time and chronologically can be separated into

•       reactor shutdown which takes place immediately,

•       first phase reactor cooling to 180°C which takes place with the BPR sodium-air exchangers available
on the secondary loops in less than one week,

•      the installation of the leak recovery circuit which requires a period of ten days associated with the
sodium 24 decay,

•        measures for completing leaktightness of the reactor pit in the lower part the neutron detectors are
withdrawn and the accesses are plugged The bottom of the reactor pit, after opening the access door, is
lined with alumina (Cnstalba) This access first requires cooling of the sodium and decay of sodium 24, and
can only take place after 10 or so days Installing the Cnstalba takes several months The reactor pit access
door is then welded up and the reactor pit is inerted (argon) Injection of the argon which normally takes place
in the lower part of the reactor pit can also be injected in the upper part

•      during the entire U4 procedure, steps for cleaning the heating part of the core are taken so as to
evacuate the residual heat addition of sodium from tank SNA or a second loop are possible

Ultimately, core assemblies are discharged The discharged sub-assemblies are washed and installed in the
APEC pool The reactor sodium can then be drained


6.2 -   RE-EXAMINATION OF THE FABRICATION FILES

The design and fabrication files were re-examined in the light of the incident encountered on the storage
drum This long task covered in priority the mam reactor vessel and its safety vessel

The new analysis of the radiographic images of the two vessels taken during manufacture highlighted

•         signs already noted during the first examination and wrongly interpreted as satisfying acceptance
criteria,

«        new indications which had not been noted during the initial inspection

The eventual noxiousness of these indications were then studied This consisted in adopting penalising
hypotheses for the dimensions of indications and their position As a first step in the calculation, the
propagation of the supposed fault was estimated by taking into account mechanical loads which may arise on
it dunng plant operation This calculation estimates in particular the consequences of a certain number of
shutdowns or events leading to mechanical stresses pn the structures studied Thus, we can determine the
maximum and pessimistic extension in length and depth of the defect A second calculation is then made to
assess the effect on this defect of an increasing mechanical load which, depending on the case, might be an
earthquake or other accident situation All these calculations take into account the penalising hypotheses and
have shown that the anomalies encountered are not noxious


6.3 -    INSPECTION OF THE MAIN REACTOR VESSEL WELDS

The inspection, which was made on 27 June 1988 to 23 August 1988, was carried out using the MIR robot
(inspection module for fast reactors)


84
This module consists of a carriage which bears on each one of the two vessels through its four wheels

A television camera reads the marks etched on the safety vessel and guides the robot

The welds are inspected using focahsed ultrasonic transducers, which employ the echographic technique,
mounted on the robot A coupling fluid is installed between the transmitter and the weld to be checked using a
small vessel containing this fluid This vessel is in contact with the wall of the zone to be inspected through a
seal A visual inspection of the weld is also carried out by a CCTV camera

The inspection programme took into account the indications noted during the examination of the radiographic
images at the end of the main vessel fabrication

The inspection carried out did not show any unacceptable faults on the welds corresponding to the size of the
faults taken into account in the " noxiousness " studies as a result of recheckmg the radiographic images, nor
the " noxious" evolution of the triple point weld condition The tnple point designates the horizontal circular
weld corresponding to the position where the weight of the core and the reactor internals are mechanically
supported

As with the water reactors, new inspections will be carried out at regular intervals using the MIR robot, the
inspection system of which proved to be accurate and effective during this first inspection operation




                                                                                                              85
                             FALL OF THE POLAR CRANE DERRICK



No.56 Date : 2 October 1989 at 17.00


1-      NATURE OF THE INCIDENT

The incident concerns an item of plant temporarily fitted on the reactor building polar crane carriage with a
view to dismantling the access gangway to the crane arch. The gangway is a structure fixed on one of the
polar crane beams which it was decided to replace by a simple hooped access ladder in 1988.

The incident occurred during the statutory testing of this derrick after erection. The reactor was shut down
and the dome was entirely closed. The test load on platform R 805 (no-risk zone) had just been raised 15 cm
The upper orientation bearing on the derrick boom broke causing the latter and its winches to fall.

The consequences on the installations were very limited: striking the dome and the chilled water system DEG
without loss of leaktightness, deformation of the cable tray without break or electricity fault.


2-      ANALYSIS

The incident is due to the failure of 8 fixing screws on the upper bearing of the boom mast at the gantry
upright. The range of boom orientation adopted on design was 90° between the longitudinal and transversal
axes of the crane In the sequences of gantry dismantling operations, the maximum bearing on the derrick
could reach 10 m in the crane longitudinal axis (removal of items in R 805) but should not exceed 4 m in the
transversal axis (elements on the crane) At the planning stage, the orientation bearing had therefore been
placed in the most penalising position, i e. on the longitudinal axis. During execution, the bearing rotational
axis was installed in the transversal axis. On testing the load in the most penalising conditions with the boom
in the longitudinal position, the bearing fixing screws were subject to shear stresses which led to their
successive failures It is to be noted that the statutory test in the fabrication workshop was carried out in the
direction of greatest strength due to the lack of space


3-      STEPS TAKEN

Inspections showed.

•       dome : absence of fault according to GDI (EOF group of laboratories) report,

•      small west cupola • impacted zone undamaged (inspected by dye penetrant and radiographic
examination) and longitudinal weld situated close to the impact undamaged (radiographic examination),

•       small cupola gangway : structural steel work non-deformed,

•       dome gangway . welding of the support on the dome undamaged (dye penetrant examination),

•       chilled water piping • replacement of a 7 m section and inspection,

»       cable trays repair, replacement of cable

The eventualu noxiousness " of the faults was analysed

•       west cupola demonstration of the buckling performances under dimensioning loading (-0 2 bar) of
the deformed part.

Analysis of the incident having demonstrated that the fundamental cause was a failure of the quality
assurance measures set up, an inquiry was initiated (see mail SX90-0174 of 19 January 1990)
Henceforth works implying load transport in the reactor hall, risk studies were required and protective
measures taken if needed to avert damages.




86
  INCREASE OF THE PRIMARY SODIUM IMPURITIES LEADING TO AN OVERSHOOT
       ON THE RANGE AUTHORISED BY THE OPERATING SPECIFICATIONS



I.S. N°61 Date 20 June 1990



1-       GENERAL INCIDENT CHRONOLOGY

After unit shutdown to permute the diluents (Sept 7 1989 to April 13 1990) and shutdown for works as a
result of detection of a leak on the feedwater purification circuit (April 28 1990 to May 31 1990), the reactor
was moved into critical mode and reached its nominal power on June 11 1990

During all this period up to the temperature build-up (June 10 20% nominal power), sodium cleanliness was
monitored by the operating teams on recordings delivered by the plugging indicators using the usual
operation methods plugging temperature Tb(1), general slope of the curve Monitoring confirmed that there
was a good level of cleanliness, in particular, the 110°C <2) level lasted around six hours

From the temperature build-up, the operator observed a plugging temperature rise and therefore an increase
in the impurities

After analysing the recordings, confirmed by the constructor and the sodium chemistry experts, the plant
concluded that the reactor was still operating in the range limits authorised by the operating specifications
(120°C<Tb<150°C) and that the return to normal conditions could be envisaged in the delay of one month
authorised by the specifications Indeed, the increase in the plugging temperature after shutdown for works
with the reactor cover open is a phenomenon which has already been observed It corresponds to the phase
of re-dissolving with the temperature of the impurities formed during the shutdown (the works having allowed
air to ingress with associated oxygen and humidity)

It was then observed that the integrated purification filtration cartridges were saturated

In addition, plugging temperature measurements did not follow the temperature decrease expected by the
experts, the operator therefore decided to stop the reactor on July 3

After reactor fast shutdown, it was maintained isothermal at a temperature of 250 °C, i e at least 40 °C above
the oxygen saturation temperature in the primary sodium when the rate of impurities was maximum (15 ppm
oxygen)

On July 9 1990, an analysis of the cover gas revealed a nitrogen content of 17% and brought into question
the previous interpretation As a result, the plugging measurements led to the conclusion that the reactor had
operated outside the operating range before being shutdown

The application of a programme of investigations to identify the air ingress into the argon of the cover gas
resulted in the origin of the pollution being discovered on July 23 This was a circulation pump on an activity
measurement channel whose diaphragms were defective 540 l/h of air entered the reactor argon circuit
downstream of this circulation pump

2-       INCIDENT DIAGNOSIS, POLLUTION LEVEL, PURIFICATION

On completion of the analysis of the plugging indicator recordings over a long period and the analysis of the
samples made at different points of the primary argon circuit, the conclusion was reached that around 120 kg
of oxygen entered the reactor system

Moreover, it results from this last analysis that the reactor operated outside the operation specification range
for three days before shutdown


(1>
  The plugging temperature is obtained on the cooling gradient of the plugging indicator pellet This gradient is initiated when the flow
   in the pellet is stable at its higher value The plugging temperature matches the beginning of flow decrease
"' The low level is initiated when the pellet temperature reached 110°C in a cooling cycle and ends when the flow in the pellet reaches
   55% of the initial flow The tow level time is therefore an indicator of the clogging speed on the pellet in a measurement cycle and
   therefore the sodium punty



                                                                                                                                      87
2.1 -   ELIMINATION OF THE REACTOR COVER NITROGEN

The nitrogen content of the primary argon circuit (17% on maximum pollution) fell as soon as the argon circuit
blowers were stopped on July 13 to reach 6% when the air ingress was eliminated on July 23

This rate then stabilised at 4% during August The argon was maintained static

During September, a series of inflation - deflation operations on the reactor cover brought the rate to 0 4%

Thereafter, the evacuation of the residual nitrogen brought it down to <0 01% at the end of August 1991 This
value is below the maximum value permitted by the operating specifications updated after the incident (0 3%)


2.2 -   SODIUM PURIFICATION

To reach the level of cleanliness required in all the reactor normal operating conditions (primary sodium oxide
rate <3 ppm operation with an oxygen rate between 3 and 5 ppm during one month at the end of a handling
period), a purification programme was implemented

This programme was run with a view to constantly controlling the changing parameters and maintaining these
in a more favourable range than on the shutdown of July 3 1990 Therefore, sudden re-dissolving or carrying
along of the sodium oxides whose presence was presumed to be at the surface of the sodium had to be
avoided

It also enabled us to acquire more thorough knowledge of pollution phenomena and behaviour of plugging
indicators

The programme therefore proceeded in several campaigns, each one of them being run based on the results
obtained during the previous campaign

1stcampaign July - October 1990 Punfication at 250°C

This campaign began by changing the cartridges on the two clogged purification units during the shutdown of
July 3 and ended by installing new cartridges It enabled 40 kg of oxygen to be trapped in this set of
cartridges

2nd campaign October 1990 - April 1991

This consisted of the following

•       initial condition reactor at 250°C, reactor pumps at 75 rpm

•       reactor sodium temperature increase to 350°C

•       reactor coolant pump speed increase to 250 rpm,

•       temperature of the reactor increased to 400°C Disturbances on the plugging measurement led to
        progressively lowering this temperature until 300°C As soon as the 375°C stable level is reached
        these disturbances are substantially mitigated

        300°C level,

•       once again, the reactor sodium temperature increased to 400°C The values measured by the
        plugging indicator authorised a fall to 180°C without any nsk of clogging,

•       final condition reactor block at 180°C, reactor coolant pumps at 75 rpm

On completion of this stage, the oxygen rate in the reactor sodium was brought to a value close to the 1 ppm
considered satisfactory

3rd campaign June-September 1991

This stage was preceded by washing of the separation column situated on the reactor argon circuit in order to
dissolve any sodium oxides in deposits trapped at the reactor outlet of the argon circuit
The campaign was undertaken in the following stages

•   Initial conditions, reactor block at 180°C, primary pumps at 75 rpm,

•   Reactor sodium temperature increased to 395°C Interference on the plugging indicators appeared
    similar to those encountered during the second stage,

•   Reactor pump speed increased to 433 rpm,

•   Reactor temperature increased to 420°C No evolution of the plugging parameters confirmed that there is
    no oxygen pollution input due to this isothermal operation at high temperature in nominal reactor pump
    rotation conditions,

•   Return to 395 °C, reactor coolant pumps operating at 110 rpm Sampling of reactor sodium for analysis
    The purification units indicated signs of clogging at the sodium inlet/outlet moderating heat exchanger
    This clogging, which translates into a fall in the thermal exchange coefficient, is attributed to the presence
    of impurities other than sodium oxide These impurities, which are in solution in the reactor sodium during
    isothermal operation at a temperature above 375°C are deposited on the cold walls of the exchanger
    tubes,

•   Return to 180°C, reactor pumps at 110 rpm

During all the reactor sodium purification phase thermal hydraulic monitoring of the reactor took place in
order to ensure that there is no clogging phenomenon by carrying along any surface creams or impurities in
narrower sections of the sub-assemblies


2.3 -   ALTERNATIVE PURIFICATION STRATEGY BY THE EXCEPTIONAL PURIFICATION CIRCUIT

As a protective measure, the auxiliary reactor sodium purification circuit of the storage drum was re-filled in
order to maintain the exceptional reactor sodium purification available through the two circuit cold traps

Since integrated purification had proved to be sufficient to eliminate the reactor sodium pollution, exceptional
purification was not undertaken


3-   EVALUATION OF THE DIRECT OR POTENTIAL CONSEQUENCES AND ASSOCIATED
ACTIONS FOR REINSTATING THE INSTALLATION

In parallel with purification, reinstatement works, non-noxiousness studies and investigations were performed


3.1 - HYDRAULIC    RELIEF VALVE   PROTECTING AGAINST                             PRESSURISATION           -   DE-
PRESSURISATION IN THE PRIMARY ARGON CIRCUIT (RAAO 01 ZH)

This saw its calibration liquid (NaK sodium-potassium mixture) oxidised by the air which entered the circuit
and this prohibited maintaining the argon in circulation This relief valve has been replaced


3.2- INSPECTION PROGRAMME - RE-QUALIFICATION OF THE REACTOR COVER AND THE
PRIMARY ARGON CIRCUIT ON WHICH THE OXIDE SPRAY COULD HAVE DEPOSITED

These inspections concluded in the absence of deposits prejudicial to the long term operation of the
equipment which were in contact with the sodium aerosols during the pollution period


3.3 -   STUDY OF THE CONSEQUENCES ASSOCIATED WITH CORROSION AND NITRIDING

A study demonstrated that the effects of the corrosion are minor and limited to the equivalent of 70 days'
operation at nominal power in normal conditions of sodium cleanliness The effects associated with nitnding
are non-significant

The conclusions of this study were validated by a formal notice issued by the CEA/EDF Materials Working
Group


                                                                                                                89
4-           FUNDAMENTAL CAUSES - INFORMATION GAINED

The fundamental causes of the incident were identified as

•        incomplete analysis during primary argon circuit design of the risks of air ingress and more generally non-
         leaktightness, and their prevention ; this occurring notably at the activity measurements circulation
         pumps,

•        absence of primary argon on-line monitoring devices in spite of such a system having been installed in
         the Phenix, PFR, KNK and SNR 300 plants,

•        incomplete referencing of equipment and preventive maintenance programmes,

•        incorrect interpretation of the plugging indicator recordings,

•        inappropriate operating specifications both in terms of their clarity and their applicability

As a result, further actions with a view to drawing all the information from the incident resulting in measures
implemented before plant start-up were undertaken before the unit was restarted


4.1 - INSTALLATION OF MONITORING EQUIPMENT (CHROMATOGRAPH) ON THE PRIMARY
ARGON CIRCUIT


4.2- DESIGN IMPROVEMENT OF THE SYSTEM FOR SAMPLING THE GAS ON THE ACTIVITY
MEASUREMENT CHANNELS

A system for detecting diaphragm failure has been installed on the circulation pumps


4.3 -         REVIEW OF THE PHENOMENA ASSOCIATED WITH POLLUTION

A series of studies and research was carried out to determine the nature, mechanical and thermodynamic
behaviour in reactor sodium of the impurities, their noxiousness in terms of the risks of clogging and corrosion
of steels, their influence on the plugging curves and the effectiveness of the trapping function with regard to
each of the impurities


4.4 -         REDRAFTING OF THE REACTOR CLEANLINESS MONITORING PROCEDURES

New criteria for monitoring the purity of the primary sodium have been defined since the parameters used
until now to detect any changes (loop temperature Tb) were considered insufficient.

Henceforth, the operator will base its operations on the unplugging temperature measurement(1) associated
with the sodium oxide (low unplugging temperature) and on the duration of the low level which is an effective
and simple method of qualitively monitoring the sodium purity and its evolution over time

The unplugging temperature is close to the saturation temperature for the impurity present in the sodium
Nevertheless, it confers a boundary which is higher than the saturation temperature based on thermodynamic
data and the cinetics of the dissolution in the pellet.


4.5 -         PROJECT REVIEW OF THE PRIMARY ARGON SYSTEM

The principle of this project review was to identify the causes of the anomalies and the dysfunctions which
could affect the " intermediate containment barrier" and " the primary sodium inert gas cover" functions of
the primary argon systems. They led to additional studies, corrective actions, counter-measures and
modifications being defined and progressively implemented.



    01
         The uncloggmg temperature is obtained on the heating gradient of the clogging indicator pellet This gradient is reached when the
         flow in the pellet reaches 55% of the initial flow and terminates when the high temperature level has been reached



90
5-      OVERALL ACTIONS

In order to make an analysis which goes beyond the specific measures directly associated with the incident
deeper reflection has been undertaken in the following aspects


5.1 -   REVISION OF THE GENERAL OPERATING RULES

Chapters 3 and 9 of the GOR have been read in detail in order to check that each specification is clear and
precise and that it results in an operating instruction which is consistent with it and that the physical means to
check compliance are appropriate


5.2 -   RE-EXAMINATION OF THE PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE PROGRAMMES

The plant has undertaken work on two main lines to ensure exhaustiveness of the preventive maintenance
operations undertaken on safety-related equipment

1st line : full listing through a campaign to identify all the equipment

2nd line by a team of equipment expert engineers, preparation of a zero point list of the preventive
maintenance procedure and then a drafting schedule


5.3 -   MAINTAINING COMPETENCES AND EXPERT CAPACITIES AVAILABLE TO THE PLANT

Actions have been undertaken in order to ensure permanent management of the competences which have to
surround the plant based on a 3-stage approach

a)      list of competences available in all the organisations involved (Novatome-Nira, CEA, EOF) ,

b)      preparation of" management contracts " formalising the undertakings of each organisation ,

c)      regular preparation of a statement of available competences


5.4 -   EXPERIENCE FEEDBACK, ANALYSIS OF THE PAST, 2ND LEVEL ANALYSIS

An organisation has been set out with means for guaranteeing satisfactory processing of experience
feedback from the plant, other French and Overseas fast neutron reactors and the PWR plants

Group for analysing potential operating problems

Its aim is, through the reading of tests, transfers, modifications and incident documents, to check that all the
information has been drawn from the plant start-up penod

Group R

The role of Group R is to organise experience feedback from French and foreign fast neutron reactors
together with PWR plants


6-      CONCLUSION

The primary sodium pollution incident, which is particularly significant of the prototype nature of the fast
neutron reactor at Creys-Malville, led to a long shutdown which justified its classification as a level 2
seriousness incident, although it did not bring into question the safety of the installations

Shutdown for sodium purification was used to make a thorough analysis of the direct and indirect causes of
the events and to take corresponding measures re-examination of the plant maintenance and operating
procedures, potential review of expertise available and needed around the operator




                                                                                                                91
COLLAPSE OF THE TRAIN A TURBINE HALL ROOF UNDER THE WEIGHT OF SNOW



I.S.No.63 Date: 13 December 1990 at 11 00


1-      NATURE OF THE INCIDENT

The weight of accumulated snow caused tram A turbine hall to collapse, leading to a loss of voltage on this
train

Since the 225 kV line was off-line at the time of the incident, tram A switchboards were without voltage

The loss of voltage led to start-up of the tram A standby diesel generators (LHPE and LHPF)

Diesel LHPE did not automatically couple and required local intervention


2-      ANALYSIS

The incident was caused by considerable snowfall which led to the collapse of the tram A turbine hall roof
Part of the cladding fell on the high-voltage equipment of tram A causing a zero-phase sequence on the mam
transformer and therefore opening of the line circuit breaker

The 225 kV was off-line and the loss of voltage led to the two diesels LHPE and LHPF starting without
coupling diesel LHPE due to incorrect operation of the voltage regulator (fuse break contacts) and despite
changeover to the standby regulator

Manual coupling of diesel LHPE led to re-powermg of the reactor coolant pump E although this was in
reverse rotation as a result of failure of a rotation sensor on this pump

The standby unloading cask (MHU) that had been stored in the turbine hall was damaged

The reactor building and steam generator access hatch was blocked in a closed position resulting in
moperability of local mode devices


3-      STEPS TAKEN

        Reconnection of the auxiliary 225 kV line and repair of LHPE diesel generator

        Installation of a 6 6 kV jumper cable between the non-emergency supplied 6 6 kV switchboards of
tram A and tram B

        Addition of special steps for clearing snow in the " cold weather" instruction

        Repair of the turbine hall

        Dimensional analysis of the roofs of the other buildings

        Repair of the MHU unloading cask

        Checks of the condition of reactor pump E after re-powering when in reverse rotation

       Decision to apply a loss of electrical source instruction throughout without seeking to use a recovered
meantime source




92
          SIMULTANEOUS OPENING OF SEVERAL CONTAINMENT BARRIERS



I.S. No.88 Date: 3 May 1995


NATURE OF THE INCIDENT

On a servicing operation on reactor coolant system argon blowers (RAAO), early dismantling of a terminal box
on blower 02 CO led to opening of the intermediate containment barrier (2n barrier) The third barrier is by-
passed by this circuit

In parallel, the truck area (4th barrier) was open, leading to the loss of the feedwater containment

This situation did not meet the operating specifications in shutdown status which require availability of at least
one of the containment barriers


ANALYSIS

The origin of the event is found in the failures which occurred in organisation of multi-competence
maintenance and due to human elements

Analysis of the event highlighted faults in preparing, scheduling, preparing withdrawal from operation and
execution of the work

The specificities of the equipment (complexity of the 2nd barrier and difficulty to identify certain of the
materials which constitute this barrier) constituted an aggravating factor


STEPS TAKEN


       Henceforth, technicians will indicate " Safety, caution containment barrier" in operation documents
and requests for maintenance regimes when carrying out work affecting the containment barrier

       The requirements of the quality organisation and safety culture have been recalled through the
presentation of a nuclear safety memo adapted to the LMFRs, notably communicated to electricity and
mechanical engineering staff A working group took into account the information gained from this incident
when drafting the risks analysis guide adapted to Creys-Malville

       Lastly, when repairs require several specialist contractors, co-ordination will be henceforth the
responsibility of a single person




                                                                                                                93
         FUSION OF THE LARGE ROTATING PLUG LIQUEFIABLE METAL SEAL


                                          REACTOR CRITICAL



I.S. No.92 Date: 12 May 1996


NATURE OF THE INCIDENT

During neutronic tests at nominal power < 3 %, the metal to metal supports of the rotating plugs were heated
48 hours before reactor shutdown. This action, which is compatible with the current tests, also led to
unintentional heating of the hquefiable metal seal (JML), the liquid status of which is incompatible with reactor
criticality


ANALYSIS

This incident caused an error in an operation sheet of procedure G 8 (Operation to Handling changeover) on
a newer version published in 1991. It was not detected by the quality assurance system used to draft the
instructions

The line of defence concerning inadvertent re-supply to the JML power cabinets (administrative lockout G21)
did not avoid the event as a result of the authorisation to remove padlocking issued by the shift engineer


STEPS TAKEN

These were of two types


        Operating instructions concerning the hquefiable metal seal


Clarification of the temperature monitoring methods for the hquefiable metal seal indicated in instructions G1
and G1-bis (conditions at start and end of monitoring, temperature at which the liquid metal seal are
considered melted).


        Criticality instructions


An inspection of the hquefiable metal seal condition added to the checks before criticality




94
               ARGON LEAK FROM THE BELL OF EXCHANGER RCPE-02-EX




NATURE OF THE EVENT

From the outset, the argon supply of intermediate exchangers has justified careful monitoring by the operator
A few re-inflations per month were observed on a few intermediate exchangers including notably IHX RCPE
02 EX

On start-up in 1994, following the long BCS shutdown, a significant increase in the frequency of bell re-
mflation on IHX-RCPE 02 EX was observed (up to around one re-inflation per day) As a result of the fast
shutdown of 17/12/94, the leak rate from the bell increased significantly to reach a value close to the
threshold set by the operator (160 mbar/day) This justified shutdown of the reactor


ANALYSIS

The investigations were earned out during reactor operation and then on hot shutdown and cold shutdown
The leak was located and characterised In view of this characterisation, the absence of a generic aspect was
checked for the other intermediate exchangers


STEPS TAKEN

Safety analysis
The analysis of the safety of the event led to the following conclusions
- leak evolution could be controlled with great reliability using operator instrumentation (pressure monitoring)
and by monitoring the re-inflation frequency
- the new inflation procedure was the subject of a safety analysis which highlighted a sufficient number of
lines of defence in terms of the identified risks
- in the event of an increase in the bell leak rate, a reactor shutdown criterion is applied This criterion, which
fixes the maximum frequency of bell re-inflation at eight per day, enabled the acceptable primary sodium
gassing (8 8 10"4 Nm3 gas /m primary sodium on average) to be complied with, including large margins This
latter rate integrates the results of the tests associated with the nsk of gas accumulation in the core support
diagnd and transferthrough the core
- aggravation of the bell argon leak did not have unacceptable consequences for reactor safety The studies
undertaken as part of the analysis of the transfer of gas into the reactor remain within the umbrella case
limits In particular, the insertion of reactivity induced by sudden de-pressurising of the bell as a result of the
pipe break at the level of the bell and the passage of gas into the reactor remain acceptable (less than 1$)
- as one of the lines of defence, in the event of fast build up of an intermediate exchanger leak rate, the fast
shutdown alarm on bell deflation (the reliability of which has been improved) enables the reactor to be quickly
brought to a sub-cntical condition

Repairs

In accordance to a repair safety file, the leak was plugged by installing a metal sleeve applied and held in
position by permanent deformation (expansion by passing hydraulic pressure) using two cnmpmgs on either
side of the leak on the inner side of the pipe (pipe co-expanded with the sleeve) The equipment used to
install the sleeve were then left in the piping, and is subject to specific periodic monitoring This technique
enabled the ongmal use of this piping to be restored This return to conformity (leak plugged) has proved to
be of an acceptable quality both at power (only one inflation weekly has become necessary) and on
shutdown




                                                                                                                95
         Annex II

EVENTS WITH BEARING ON EFR




                             97
28.09.85   7    reactor trip                                  hydraulic coupler and        design of the primary flowrate measurement;
                                                              primary sodium flowrate      procedure (rod insertion before changeover to
                                                              measurement                  pony motor)

08.10.85   8    emergency shutdown by clad break              core measurement             instrumentation and control (very weak currents)
                detection                                     conveyance

22.10.85   11   emergency shutdown by clad break              core measurement             instrumentation and control (very weak currents)
                detection                                     conveyance

22.11.85   12   loss of power induced reactor trip followed   primary pumps inertia        relaying design
                by coast-down of primary pumps without        device
                inertia

07.01.86   18   abnormal heating of subassembly               plug left in sub-assembly    quality control
                                                              leg

06.04.86   24   reactor trip due to fertile sub-assembly      temperature fluctuation at   thermocouples positioned closer to sub-
                overheating                                   sub-assembly outlet          assemblies; hot header thermalhydraulics

08.05.86   25   bursting of handling cask observation         thermal effect on seal       design
                window                                        tightening

02.04.87   39   DVS rods fall-down due to trip signal by      primary sodium flowrate      design of the primary flowrate measurement
                flowrate measurement when changing over       measurement
                one primary pump to pony motor

08.03.87   40   leakage of the fuel storage drum main         steel grade                  steel grade; safety vessel anchored in reactor pit;
                vessel                                                                     refractory concrete

21.05.87   43   rupture of one DHR fan blades                 fan (fatigue rupture)        quality control

11,0198    53   anomaly in the fast isolation-decompression   instrumentation and          instrumentation and control
12.01.89        sequence of a steam generator                 control

28.04.90   60   sodium leakage on the F secondary loop        tee-connection (thermal      analysis of hot/cool sodium mixing conditions
                auxiliary system                              fatigue)

20.06.90   61   rise in primary sodium impurities level       rupture of membrane in       addition of catharometer
                leading to exceed the limits authorised by    gas radiometer; cover gas
                operational technical specifications          chemical monitoring

12;05;9    65   sodium leakage on C-train diverse DHR         plugging indicator (pre-     pre-heating design
1               plugging indicator                            heating)

15.09.93   79   rupture of E-primary pump coupling            gear coupling                gear design (allowing for shaft tilting), cog
                                                                                           material (nitride steel)

19.04.94   82   discovery of through wall crack on rupture    balancing line connections   elimination of connections on dead leg
                disks balancing line of C-train DHR loop

03.05.95   88   simultaneous opening of the cover gas         argon blower                 maintenance-designed equipment and plant
                circuit and the reactor trucking gate
                                                                                XA0056254
   OPERATING EXPERIENCE WITH BELOYARSK
   FAST REACTOR BN600 NPP

   O.M. SARAEV
   Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Plant,
   Sverdlovsk Region, Russian Federation




  Abstract


  The main results of the seventeen-year operation of the BN600 Nuclear Power Plant are
  considered. The principal backfittings of the main BN600 Power Plant equipment are
  presented and summarised.



Introduction

In 1997 BN600 has accumulated 17 years of power generation. Connection to
grid took place on April 8, 1980. The design electrical power as high as 600 MW
was achieved in December 1981.

The experience from BN600 power generation shows BN600 to be reliable in
control, safe and highly valuable for further commercial deployment of large
fast reactor power plants at the current stage of nuclear power development.

During operation the following objectives set out at the design phase were
achieved:

      - demonstration of sustained, reliable and safe operation of a sodium
      cooled fast reactor power plant,

      - long lifetime testing of the large components operating in sodium
      environment in high neutron and gamma fields,

      - mastering of the sodium technology, optimization and improvement of
      the operating plant procedures, mastering of the sodium equipment
      replacement and maintenance technology,


Summary of Power Plant Operation

At present time the BN600 power plant is in steady operation under electrical
capacity ranging from 580 to 610 MW.

                                                                                          101
During a number of recent years beginning from 1983 the load factor of the
operating power plant has been in the range of 72 to 80% (the overall load
factor is 73.5%) and outages are mainly made for reloads. During 77% of time
the power plant generated electrical power as planned, 21% of time were spent
for the planned maintenance and reload outages, the unplanned losses
accounted for less than 2% of time.

Totally (as of 1/11/97) 36 reactor core reloads have been carried out at peak
discharge burnup of 10% h.a. and experimental fuel burnup of 11.8% h.a.

Short-term objectives in respect of the core are further tests of various
plutonium fuel sub-assemblies and the activities on the third modification of the
11% h.a. burnup core.

17 years of the BN600 power plant operation showed good agreement of the
design and actual performance of the main components. The following
technical and economical indicators were achieved:

Table 1

 No           Indicator              Unit           Total value as of 1/1 1/97

 1. Electrical generation         mln kW-h                   64459,1
 2. Auxiliary power                   %                         7,5
 3. Load factor                       %                        73,5
 4. Availability factor               %                        75,3
 5. Gross efficiency                  %                        41,5
 6. Net     efficiency                %                        38,5
 7. Number of plant                 unity                       67
    outages
 8. Number of loop                   unity                   19V26M7
    disconnections
 9. Average output                   MW                        —

Steady, reliable and safe operation of the power plant and its high technical and
economical performance could be provided only due to the large scope of the
integrated research and development activities resulting in modification of some
units and systems.

Besides it was required to develop and modify core components (fuel sub-
assemblies, control rod guide tubes and control rods), to explore and modify
electrical drives of sodium pumps, to modify a reactor refuelling system, to
construct advanced failed fuel detection systems, to design and construct
advanced reactor vessel integrity inspection systems, reactor vessel and auxiliary
primary sodium pipeline displacement measurement systems, to remarkably
improve water-sodium reaction detection systems of the water-sodium steam

102
generators, to construct technical diagnostic systems of the reactor and steam
generator components, to determine and extend equipment lifetime and to carry
out many other activities; even this rather incomplete scope of the objectives
shows a novelty and variety of the problems which have been successfully
solved by the Beloyarsk NPP team in cooperation with OKBM, IPPE,
GIDROPRESS design company.

During operation a high degree of the radiation safety of the BN600 power
plant under the sustained operating conditions at the rated generation
parameters was provided for. The results of the measurements of the radiation
environment and process medium activity have shown their values to be within
the design limits. The radiation levels in the attended and semi-attended areas of
the reactor building have been within the authorized limits, the gamma
radiation levels of the secondary circuit components have been within the
natural background limits.

Atmospheric discharges have been well within the limits and within the range of
2 to 10 Ci/day (522 Ci/year in average) and they tend to decrease; there have
actually been no liqiud radioactive effluents from the plant while it being
operated. The average release of the solid radioactive waste is 22 mVyear. The
average collective dose of the plant personnel is 84 rem/year.

Results of 17-year Operation of Power Plant

Reactor Core

Since 1980 till 1986 the BN600 reactor operated with the core of the firstload
type with the peak burnup of lowly enriched fuel being as high as 6.1% h.a. and
that of highly enriched fuel 8.3% h.a.

During operation of the first type core the fuel failure occurences have been
observed by the end of nearly each interval between reloads. As a result of
examination of the irradiated fuel sub-assemblies it was found that the fuel
failures had been generally caused by the strained operational fuel conditions
(due to peak linear ratings as high as 54 kW/m and reshuffling of highly
enriched fuel sub-assemblies from the outer towards the inner core locations) as
well as by poor fuel cladding structural materials. It should be noted that it was
the highly enriched fuel that mostly failed in the core.

During 1986 and 1987 the reactor was changed over to the modified core (01M)
with the peak burnup as high as 8.3% h.a. to improve fuel performance and to
increase BN600 reactor fuel burnup. The new peak burnup values were 6.5%
h.a. for the lowly enriched fuel, 6.9% h.a. for the intermediately enriched fuel
and 8.3% h.a. for the highly enriched fuel. The principal difference between the
first load type core and the modified core was an increase in the height of a fuel
fissile section from 750 to 1000 mm and utilization of three uranium 235 fuel
enrichments, i.e. 17%, 21% and 26% instead of 21% and 33%.


                                                                               103
Just after the change-over to the first modification core (the beginning of the
20th cycle) all the fuel failure causes were actually corrected, namely:

      - the core: the peak linear rating was decreased down to 47.2 kW/m and
      the advanced structural materials more resistant to radiation were started
      to be used as well as the reshuffling of highly enriched fuel sub-assemblies
      from the outer towards the inner core locations was removed out of
      practice,

      - the radial blanket: the fuel pin gas plenum height was increased from
      160 to 310 mm and the band spacing of fuel pins was introduced.

Over a period of 1988 to 1990 the reactor operated with the first modification
core.

Over a period of 1991 to 1993 the reactor was changed over to the second
modification core with the new peak burnup values being 9.0% h.a. for the
lowly enriched fuel, 9.5% h.a.for the intermediately enriched fuel and 10% h.a.
for the highly enriched fuel.

This was enabled by the utilization of the advanced fuel cladding and wrapper
materials resistant to a damage dose as high as 100 dpa.

The fissile height was increased from 1000 to 1030 mm and the effective fuel
density from 8.5 to 8.6 g/cm3 to provide for the necessary reactivity margin in
the second modification core by means of the 4% increase in the fuel load.
The outer radial blanket was extended by 16 fuel sub-assemblies and the in-
reactor storage became respectively less by 16 fuel assemblies.

The first (01M) and the second (01 Ml) modification cores themselves have the
same configuration, i.e. 136 lowly enriched fuel sub-assemblies of 17%
enrichment, 94 intermediately enriched fuel sub-assemblies of 21% enrichment
and 139 highly enriched fuel sub-assemblies of 26% enrichment.

The radiation-resistant fuel structural materials, i.e. the 3FI-450 steel as
wrapper material and the HC-68 steel as cladding material, are used.

Table 2 shows the main characteristics of the cores and the operating fuel
conditions.

319 experimental fuel sub-assemblies were tested in the BN600 reactor.

In support of the BN800 reactor core design validation 6 vibro-packed and 8
pelletized MOX fueled sub-assemblies have been tested in the reactor and 4
more sub-assemblies are being tested.




104
By present time the 11.3% h.a. peak fuel burnup BN600 reactor core design has
been elaborated and is at the stage of approval and fmalization. The activities
on development of the 12% h.a. peak burnup core have been started.


Table 2 The main characteristics of the BN600 reactor cores

No Characteristic          First type of the         First           Second
   identification              core (01)         modernization     modernization
                                                    (01M)             (02M)
 I.   Number of fuel
      sub-assemblies,
      pcs.:
      - Low enriched    217                    136               136
      fuel S/As
      - Intermediately  —                      94                94
      enriched
      fuel S/As
      - Highly enriched 144                    139               139
      fuel S/As
      -Depleted         8                      —                 —
      uranium dioxide
      control rods
2.    Weight of
      enriched
      uranium, kg (%
      of enrichment):
      - Low enriched     20,0 (21)             27,6(17)          28,9(17)
      fuel S/As
      - Intermediately   —                     27,6 (21)         28,9 (21)
      enriched fuel S/As
      - Highly enriched 20,0 (33)              27,6 (26)         28,9 (26)
      fuel S/As
3.    Core               750                   1000              1030
      height, mm
4.    Peak local
      burnup, % h.a.:
      - Low enriched     6,1                   6,5               9,0
      fuel S/As
      - Intermediately   —                     6,9               9,5
       enriched
      LJuel S/As
      - Highly enriched   8,3                  8,3               10,0
      fuel S/As




                                                                               105
TABLE 2 (cont.)


5.  Peak damage
    dose, dpa:
    - Low enriched     49,1   53,3      75,0
    fuel S/As
    - Intermediately   —      51,0      72,0
    enriched fuel S/As
    - Highly enriched 42,5    54,0      69,0
    fuel S/As
6. Fuel residence
    time, efpd:
    - Low enriched     200    330       480
    fuel S/As
    - Intermediately   —      330       480
    enriched fuel S/As
    - Highly enriched 300     330\495   480
    fuel S/As
7.  Height of axial
    blankets, mm:
    - upper axial
    blanket height     400    300       300
    -lower axial
    blanket height     400    380       350
8.  Height of pin gas 800     660       660
    plenum, mm
9. Effective fuel      8,2    8,5       8,6
    density, g/cm3
10. Hot spot fuel      706    697       696
    cladding
    temperature, ° C
11. Peak fuel
    sub-assembly
    power, MW:
    - Low enriched     4,5    4,4       4,4
    fuel S/As
    - Intermediately   —      4,5       4,6
    enriched fuel S/As
    - Highly enriched 4,7     4,6       4,7
    fuel S/As
12. Peak linear
    rating, MW/m:
    - Low enriched     53     43        43
    fuel S/As
    - Intermediately   —      45        44
    enriched fuel S/As
    - Highly enriched 54      48        47
    fuel S/As


106
Fuel Handling Systems

Operating Experience from Reactor Refuelling System

As it is mentioned above 36 reactor reloads have been carried out since the
power unit has been put into operation. In general the refuelling system
performance during this period of time was sufficiently reliable - in fact no
failures which would have caused the delay of making the reactor critical
occurred. It is the refuelling system mechanism position indication and control
system that has mostly been a trouble contributor. As far as the mechanical part
is concerned the following operating results can be noted:

A. The fresh fuel argon-filled and the irradiated fuel sodium-filled storage
drums

Since the start of operation neither failures nor faults have occurred. On the
basis of the initial operation a number of the irradiated fuel storage sodium-
filled drum cells have been bored to provide for the unloading of the irradiated
fuel sub-assemblies with the considerably distorted hexagonal wrappers.

B. The gas gate valves of the irradiated fuel sodium-filled storage drum

At the initial stage we had to replace the sealing elements (made of
fluoroplastic). After they had been replaced with the rubber ones (specific
rubber) no problems emerged.

C. The sub-assembly transfer mechanism of the transfer chamber

During operation a number of the mechanism design faults have been found.
For example, the strip counterbalance rope lifetime is short, indication of the
strip position and the gripper directly from the function element is required,
fixing of the vertical shaft of the gripper drive is insufficient. By present time the
documentation has been elaborated and fabrication of the mechanism
backfitting parts is under way.

D. The rotating plugs

The plugs have caused no problems during initial 2 or 3 years of operation. On
the basis of the feedback from BN350 and taking into account the experience
gained at the BN600 reactor from the monitoring of the protective liquid and
hydraulic seal eutectic the former was decided to be periodically replaced and
cleaned to remove mechanical impurities.

At present time the protective liquid is replaced once a year in accordance with
the reactor maintenance schedule. Up to 1994 pre-operation driving of the
rotating plugs caused no major problems - it used to take a number of hours
and the time was spent mostly to better heat up the eutectic. Since the autumn

                                                                                  107
outage held in 1994 the rubbing of the large rotating plug and since May 1995
the rubbing of the small rotating plug have been observed and as for the
rubbing of the large rotating plug it has never been observed any longer. The
rubbing consisted in higher force on the handwheel of the hand drive and
respectively in higher drive motor current with the largest increase related to
one particular sector. The recurrence of this situation takes place up to now and
the level of the rubbing is somehow higher. At present time different options to
mitigate and correct the rubbing are being tested. The most likely reason is
deposition of sodium in the gaps between the plugs due to violation of the their
cooling conditions.
E. The refuelling mechanisms

Over a total period of operation the refuelling mechanisms have caused no
major problems.
Operating Experience from Sub-Assembly Cleaning System

Over a total period of operation the core sub-assembly cleaning system
performance was sufficiently reliable. Like with the fuel handling system it is the
mechanism position indication and control system that has mostly been a
trouble contributor with an impact from the process control and monitoring
system. The process configuration itself is unsatisfactory since the manifold
of the steam-water cleaning cells is combined with the equipment cleaning
system (large capacities, risk of overflows and leaks, etc...).

As far as the mechanical part is concerned the following operation results can
be noted:

A. The gas gate valves of the irradiated fuel sodium-filled storage drum and
irradiated fuel discharge pit

Since the accumulated running time of these gate valves is much more than that
of the similar gate valves located on the side of the transfer chamber the
intervals between replacements of the gate element rubber sealing rings and
between inspections of the gate valve drives are shorter.

B. The cleaning cell wedge gate valves

So far these valves have caused no serious problems.

C. The irradiated fuel discharge pit mechanisms
Of all the mechanisms the conveyor has naturally accumulated the longest
running time. All the irradiated fuel discharge pit mechanisms have their design
faults (each mechanism has its own design faults) although up to recent time
their performance has caused no serious troubles (to provide for this the
necessary measures on the periodicity and scope of the maintenance and

108
technical inspection have been taken just after the beginning of operation). Now
fabrication of new drives for all the irradiated fuel discharge pit mechanisms is
in hand.

Reactor and Primary Heat Tramsfer Systems

In general the performance of the reactor and its in-vessel components is
successful.

Control Rod Drives

The control rod drives and the ion chamber hangers are under normal operating
conditions. There are 27 control rod drives installed in the reactor.

The specified lifetime of the control rod drives is set up to be 120000 hours. At
present time a complex of the material tests in support of the extension of the
lifetime is under way.

Sodium-Sodium Intermediate Heat Exchangers
Intermediate heat exchangers are filled with sodium on primary and secondary
sides and provide for the necessary heat removal at nominal power.

The performance of the intermediate heat exchangers has been trouble-free.
Their lifetime was specified to be 20 years.

In support of IHX replacement a complex of activities including correction of
exsisting technical documentation and elaboration of new technical
documentation, inspection of a spare IHX and fabrication of new IHXs has
been planned. The first IHX has been planned to be replaced not later than
1999.

Primary Sodium Pumps

The primary sodium pumps at the BN600 reactor are of the centrifugal vertical
type with a lower hydraulic bearing.
During the power unit commissioning period until March 1981 the pump
performance has been trouble-free but during a routine increase in pump speed
when reactor power was built up the pump shaft - motor engagement element
failures causing trips of the pumps have been observed.

Over period of 1982 to 1984 higher vibration of the pupms, cracking of the
shafts, damages to the half-couplings and unreliable performance of the electric
drives have been observed.




                                                                              109
The damages of the half-couplings were of the fatigue nature. In order to
provide for the normal primary pump performance the following activities have
been carried out:

      - shaft strain measurements that allowed torsional shaft fluctuations
      within the operating speed range and the coincidence of the drive power
      output fluctuations with the natural frequency of the torsional shaft
      fluctuations to be detected,

      - replacement of the shafts with the modified ones less in diameter and
      differing in design from the old shafts,

      - redesign of the motor rotor - pump shaft engagement half-couplings,

      - introduction of the primary and the secondary pump vibration
      monitoring systems,

      - change-over to the non-controllable operation of the motor (cage rotor)
      after achievement of the nominal power of the reactor.

The shaft seals preventing gas leaks, the brush-contact unit and the electric drive
tachometer generator attachment unit have been also modified. Owing to the
actions taken the failures of the pumps causing the abnormal operating
conditions have been avoided since the 15th cycle (since December, 1985).

The lifetime of the removable components of the pumps after modification of
the impeller was specified to be 50000 hours.

Primary Sodium and Irradiated Fuel Storage
Drum Sodium Purification Systems

During operation the purification systems were used to provide for the
sufficiently effective cleaning of sodium up to the required standards both on-
load and off-load.

As of 1/11/97 accumulation of the sodium oxides in the cold traps has amounted
to the following:

coldtrap3OJI-lA: Okg
cold trap 3OJT-IB: 1264kg
cold trap 3OJ1-IB: 214kg
cold trap 3OJI-IF: 907kg
cold trap 3OJI-BOC: 696kg

while the rated capacity of each cold trap is 1830 kg.



110
The cold trap 3OJ1-1A installed in the primary sodium purification is not filled
with sodium and is stored under standby conditions while the cold trap 3OJT-1F
is temporally removed out of service after a sodium leak event occurred on
October?, 1993.

Irradiated Fuel Sodium-Filled Storage Drum Cooling System
The cooling system is used to remove the decay heat from the fuel sub-
assemblies being located in the irradiated fuel sodium-filled storage drum.

In order to comply with the regulations the backfitting activities including
installation of the additional valves and outfitting of the pipelines with guard
jackets up to the second gate valves inclusive have been completed on the
system.

Steam Generators and Secondary Heat Transfer System

Steam Generators
Over a total period of BN600 operation 12 water-sodium reaction events have
been observed in the steam generator modules: 1 in the evaporator module, 5 in
the superheater modules and 6 in the reheater modules.

In all the events irrespective of a leak size no increase in pressure in the
expansion tank up to the alarm setting has been observed and the operational
power plant safety has remained within the limits.

The precised design concept of a 'Large leak' event and the steam generator
emergency protection system operation algorythms were validated by the
analysis of the leak behaviour. In 10 events the failed modules have been
replaced with new ones and in 2 events the failed modules have been restored
and put into operation again. The restored evaporator module 5H-A3 has
accumulated 7280 trouble-free running hours after the intervention and has
been replaced with the new one for material testing.
The restored reheater module 5nri-B3 has accumulated 53854 running hours
after the intervention and has been removed out of service on indications of
water-sodium reaction having totally accumulated 68366 running hours.

Thus the design concept of the maintainability of the steam generator modules
if they have been disconnected at the early phase of the 'Small leak1 event
development has been also validated.

By now the steam generators have accumulated about 115000 running hours
each. During the spring outage the planned replacement of all the evaporator
modules with the expired lifetime was completed. The lifetime of the replaced
modules was extended from 50000 running hours as forseen by the design up to
105000 running hours.


                                                                             ill
The operating experience from the power plant shows the sectional modular
steam generators in use to have high operational reliability. The feasibility of
the steam generator operation at the rated power with 7 sections connected has
been experimentally validated. Owing to this among 12 water-sodium reaction
events occurred only two events have required a loop disconnection and one
event necessitated power plant shutdown.

Examination of the failed modules has shown that the most likely reason of a
sodium-water reaction is a manufacturing fault failed to be found during
anufacturer's tests using applicable inspection methods.Over a total period of
operation a series of the following activities on the steam generators has been
fulfilled aiming at improvement of their reliability:

      - optimization of pre-start and re-agent cleaning procedures,
      - correction of the design faults of the main sodium valves,
      - modification of the reheater module cover seal units,
      - backfitting of the drain and blow-off pipelines,
      - modification of the module sodium-water reaction detection systems.

Description of Secondary Circuit Equipment Performance

Over a total period of operation the secondary circuit equipment performance
has been sufficiently reliable. The planned scope of work in accordance with
the maintenance and in-service metal inspection schedules has been fulfilled
on the secondary circuit components and pipelines. During 1995 and 1996 the
sodium feeding units of all the cold traps have been repaired.

The overhaul of the main steam generator sodium gate valves has been carried
out following the developed procedures.

The work on regeneration of the secondary cold traps in accordance with the
procedure developed by the nuclear reactor research centre is in hand.

Table 3 shows the data on the impurity accumulation by the cold traps.

Table 3
             Cold trap in-house                Accumulated impurity weight,
             identification                               kg
                  4OJI-2A                                   447,1
                   40J1-2B                                   733
                   50J1-2A                                   849
                   5OJI-2E                                   888
                  6OJI-2A                                    604
                   60J1-2B                                   698

The design capacity of each cold trap is 1830 kg of impurities.

112
Secondary Sodium Plants
Over a total period of power plant operation 2 failures of the pumps have
occurred both leading to the power reduction of the plant with a loop
disconnection, i.e. in 1980 the motor and tachometer generator shaft coupling
failed and in 1985 the electric motor brush unit failed.

The lifetime of the removable components of the pumps was specified to be
100000 hours.

Turbines and Water-Steam Heat Transfer System

In general the turbine performance is successful.

The main pipelines have brought no serious troubles throughout the entire
operation period.

The electrical generators are commercially manufactured and proven
components.

However over a total period of their operation the events involving the loss of
integrity of the stator water cooling system have been observed. Several times
these events caused unplanned generator trips. The reason is an imperfect design
of the stator rod seals.
Instrumentation and Control System

This system has caused the largest number of the plant generation losses this
being accounted for by incomplete applicability of the typical designs used by
the designer of the fast reactor power unit. This system had been remarkably
modified before it stopped to be a source of the troubles.

Analysis of Power Plant Equipment and System Failures
Categorization of Failures

For the analysis the abnormal operation events related to the reduced and
limited power have been selected. The failures of the following eqipment and
systems of the plant has been scrutinized:

      -the reactor,
      -the fuel sub-assemblies,
      -the primary and secondary pumps,
      -the primary circuit equipment including the intermediate heat
      exchangers,
      -the steam generators,
      -the water-steam circuit equipment,
      -the turbines,


                                                                             113
      -the electical equipment,
      -the monitoring, control and protection systems of the reactor, sodium
      pumps and turbine.

Besides equipment the errors of operators and maintenance staff have been
taken into account.

The largest percentages of the abnormal plant operation events due to
equipment failures are as follows:

      - 22.1% (of the total number of events): failures of the monitoring, control
      and protection systems,
      - 12.8%: the electrical equipment failures,
      - 12.7%: failures of the primary and the secondary sodium pumps,
      - 11.6%: failures of the water-steam circuit equipment,
      - 10.4%: failures of the fuel cladding and wrappers.

Consequences of Failures

Totally 104 failures have occurred over a total operation period. The abnormal
operation events due to equipment and system failures resulted in 28 plant
shutdowns of which 18 shutdowns involved reactor scrams (5 events involved
manual reactor emergency shutdowns). In the remainder the plant power
reductions took place.

Sodium Leaks

Over a total operation period 27 leaks into the environment of which 5 events
involved radioactive sodium leaks have occurred. 14 events have involved active
burning of sodium. Five leaks have been caused by the personnel errors.

The main causes of the leaks have been the following:

      - insufficient thermal compensation and manufacturing faults of
      pipelines,
      - imperfect valve designs,
      - loss of leaktightness of the flange joints of the system of sodium
      reception from tank cars.

The most serious leak occured in the primary sodium purification system
pipeline on October 7, 1993. The volume of the spilled sodium was about 1000
litres but owing to sufficiently effective performanceof the leak suppression
system the release of radioactivity outside the plantwas only 10 Ci. The
increased exposure of the plant and public did not occur.

The description of the sodium leaks is as follows:


114
Table 4
 No              System           Number       Sizes,!    Number     Radioactivity
                                              (sodium        of       release, Ci
                                           burning events sodium
                                                 are      burning
                                            underlined)    events
  1.             Reactor            —            ——,         —            —
  2.          Primary citcuit       5
 2.1.        Gas purification       1               0,1      —            —
                  system
 2.2.      Sodium purification      4             0,3-3,0-   1       0-0,2-0,5-10
                  system                       0,2-1000
 2.3.     Sodium storage system     —                —       —            —
  3.         Steam generator        1
 3.1.     Leak detection system     1                2       1            —
  4.        Sodium reception        3          10-50-10      3            —
                  system
  5.        Secondary circuit       17
 5.1.         Main pipelines        —            —           —            —
 5.2.          Main valves          4      1-300-30-10       3            —
 5.3.      Drain and blow-off       9      0.2-1-10-600-     6            —
                   lines                    300-100-0-1
 5.4.       Drain line valves        1           0           —            —
 5.5.     Sodium storage system      3         1-0-0         —            —
                 TOTAL:             27            ~ 2500     15          10,7


Abnomal Operation Event Causes

The abnormal plant operation events can be divided into 2 categories:
        - due to personnel errors,
        - due to process equipment failures.

Percentages of these two groups for a total period are as follows:

        - events due to staff errors 20.8% of which 12.5% are operator errors,
        8.3% are maintenance staff errors;
        - 79.2% are equipment failures.

The failures observed in the plant have not caused the operational safety limits
to be exceeded and are of level 0 or 1 on international nuclear event scale.




                                                                                115
                                                                                     XA0056255
     FAST REACTOR OPERATING EXPERIENCE GAINED IN
     RUSSIA: ANALYSIS OF ANOMALIES AND ABNORMAL OPERATION CASES

     Y.M. ASHURKO, R.P. BAKLUSHIN, Y.I. ZAGORULKO,
     V.N. IVANENKO, V.P. MATVEYEV
     State Scientific Centre of the Russian Federation,
     Institute of Physics and Power Engineering,
     Obninsk

     B.A. VASILYEV
     Experimental Design Bureau of Machine Building,
     Nizhny Novgorod

     Russian Federation




    Abstract

     Review of various anomalous events and abnormal operation experience gained in
the process of Russian fast reactors operation is given in the paper. The main
information refers to the BN-600 demonstration reactor operation.
     Statistical data on sodium leaks and steam generator failures are presented, and
sources of these events and countermeasures taken to avoid their appearance on the
operating reactors as well as related changes made in the BN-800 reactor design are
considered.
     In the paper, some features of impurities behaviour are considered in various
modes of the BN-600 reactor operation. Information is given on the impurities ingress
into the circuits, on abnormal situation emerged in the process of the BN-600 reactor
operation and its probable cause.
     Information is presented on the event related to the increased torque of the BN-
600 reactor central rotating column and repair works performed.


    INTRODUCTION

     Three sodium cooled fast reactors are currently in operation in Russia, namely
BR-10 and BOR-60 experimental reactors and BN-600 demonstration reactor NPP.
NPP with the BN-350 prototype reactor is now on the territory of Kazakhstan
Republic. However Russian institutions and enterprises which participated in the
design development and construction of the BN-350 reactor are now involved in its
operation.
     Considerable experience has been gained by the Russian specialists on tests and
operation of sodium cooled fast reactors (over 100 reactor-years). Based on this
experience, modifications were made of systems .and components of the reactors in
operation, as well as of the BN-800 reactor design.
     In this respect, the experience gained in the process of operation of the BN-600
which is the largest in Russia fast reactor, is of the highest value. Therefore, in this
paper, events occurred on the BN-600 reactor are mainly described.


                                                                                           117
   1. ANALYSIS OF SODIUM LEAKS

      1.1. Experience gained on sodium leaks

During the operation of domestic fast reactors the following quantities of sodium
leaks took place:
    BR-10                  19
    BN-350                 15
    BN-600                 27
    At the BOR-60 practically no sodium leaks occurred.
    According to their initiation causes the leaks have been distributed as follows:
        BR-5/10:
         pipe burning-through by electric heaters                                    2
         failures of pump-vessels level indicator sensors                            6
         sodium valve failures                                                       7
         improper procedure of sodium unfreezing                                     2
         manufacture defect                                                          1
         crack formation on a pipe                                                   1

          BN-350:
          flange joint defects                                                       2
          improper procedure of sodium unfreezing                                    6
          intercircuit leaks in steam generators                                     2
          mechanical formation of holes as a result of direct actions by personnel   4
          uncertain (may be, corrosion)                                              1

          BN-600:
          steam generator sodium valve seals                                         5
          flange joint defects                                                       5
          improper procedure of sodium unfreezing                                    4
          mechanical formation of holes as a result of direct actions by personnel   2
          manufacture defects                                                        3
          sodium valve failures                                                      2
          crack formation on pipes                                                   6

Burning-through by electric heating

     Burning-through of pipes by electric heating occurred at an early stage of BR-5
reactor operation when experience in designing and operation of sodium systems was
insufficient, and incorrect decisions were often made. These burns-through occurred
due to earthing to the frame of an electric heater and formation of short circuit and
electric arc between the electric heater and piping. Later the scheme of heaters' power
supply was changed: a transformer with insulated neutral wire was used. This scheme
has been used at all domestic fast reactors. No losses of tightness due to this cause
occurred any more.

Defects of valves

     At the BR-5/10, sodium valve leaks took place as a result of two causes: during
the initial period of operation - because of bellows seal defects, and in the subsequent

118
period - because of introduction of valves with improperly designed casings. In the first
group of causes sodium did not leak outside the boundaries of a back-up gacket seal
(i.e., leak volume did not exceed several cm3), and in the second group the valve
casing was crushed by sodium expanding at heating up but the leaks were also very
small. At the BN-600 in one case the leak occurred because of wastage of packing
between the casing and the bellows (less than 1 kg of sodium leaked out, no fire
occurred) and in another case the leak was caused by a poor-quality joint weld in
which some craters developed (also less than 1 kg of sodium leaked out, no burning
occurred).

Improper procedure of unfreezing

     Rather high percentage is made up by leaks taking place as a result of improper
procedure of unfreezing of sodium that was frozen within some section of the system.
Unfreezing should be carried out from the free level of sodium, by switching the
heaters in a strict sequence, after melting of sodium in the preceding section of the
pipe. At sodium expansion within a closed volume as a result of phase transition some
seal ruptures of sodium valves, pipes, electromagnetic pump vessels took place. The
causes of these events were improper arrangement of heaters, errors in operating
instructions, personnel errors. As a rule, leakages took place in the presence of
personnel, at changing operating conditions of systems, mainly at start-up or repair
work.

Manufacture defects

     Four leaks occurred because of poor-quality manufacture of sodium system units.
 So, at the BR-5/10 immediately after mounting of the primary circuit impurity cold
trap a leak occurred at the trap nozzle through a microcrack in the joint weld at
sodium heating up in the pipe. The cause of the leak was poor quality inspection of
joint welds after completion of assembling. Similar situations took place at the BN-600
as well. Such leaks were detected immediately after putting into operation of a failed
section of the system.

Flange joint defects

     In sodium systems the joints are made, as a rule, by means of welding. Some
exceptions include flange joints of the sodium preparation system. Tanks for sodium
transport (for example tank cars) are connected to sodium circuits with the use of
removable sections. Often after carrying out of the connection operation some leaks
through flange joints appeared. These leaks were immediately detected by personnel
carrying out the operations and (or) by monitoring systems.

     Sodium gate valves cutting off the BN-600 steam generator modules from the
circuit have flange joints which are backed up by welded sealing lips. It was initially
supposed that the flange joints would assure tightness, and no due importance was
attached to weld joints quality. After appearance of sodium leaks through these seals
the sealing lips were welded and weld quality was carefully checked. Subsequently no
leaks on gate valves occurred.




                                                                                     119
Intercircuit leaks in steam generators

     At the BN-350 two rather large sodium leaks occurred as a result of defect
formation in steam generator heat transfer tubes. In the first case after "sodium-water"
reaction occurrence the operation of the steam generator safety system and sodium and
water draining from its spaces took place. However, because of personnel errors the
cutting-off of the steam generator third circuit and sodium draining were incomplete
and into the secondary circuit the ingress of water continued which interacted with
sodium remaining in the circuit. Approximately in 5 hours after carrying out activities
on steam generator draining a sodium leak from the sodium drainage pipe-line was
detected. The pipe break and leakage of sodium with products of its interaction with
water occurred as a result of the effect of this reaction products upon pipe material and
of high temperature. Leaking out took place through an opening of 10-15 mm in-
diameter formed in the area of a joint weld at the butt joint of pearlitic and austenitic
steel. In the second case leaking out of sodium through the evaporator vessel of other
steam generator type took place. As in the previous case, the cause of the leak was a
loss of tightness of an evaporator tube and sodium-water reaction in the intertubular
space. The failed tube was located adjacent to the evaporator vessel and the leaking-
out jet of water was aimed directly at the vessel. The effect of reaction products and of
high temperature resulted in the development of the opening in the vessel and sodium
leakage.

Mechanical formation of holes as a result of direct actions by personnel

      Several sodium leaks were the result of immediate personnel actions. For example,
cuts on pipelines at carrying out repair work followed by erroneous supply of sodium
at the place of cut. In one case, the leak occurred as a result of a gross error of
personnel who started the withdrawal of the BN-350 secondary-circuit sampler-
distillator level indicator without cutting off the distillator from the circuit. All these
leaks were recorded immediately.

Crack formation

     One leak at the BR-5/10 and six leaks at the BN-600 took place through cracks
developed at pipelines in the process of operation. All of them were the result either of
improper design solutions, or of improper assembling and were related to insufficient
temperature self-compensation of pipelines. So, at the BR-5/10 a leak of sodium in the
region of drainage pipeline adjacent to the main pipeline took place. Leak volume did
not exceed several tens of cm3. Sodium did not leak outside the heat insulation
boundaries. At the inspection of the leak site there was detected a crack in solid metal
of the drainage reducer pipe connection. The crack was -0.5 mm wide and spread to
about one half (40 mm) the diameter of the pipe. Adjacent to the through crack on the
inner surface of the pipe connection there were microcracks up to 0.4 mm deep. The
cause of crack formation was insufficient freedom of drainage pipe movement at
changing temperature conditions of the main circuit. Cracks at the BN-600 had an
analogous cause and were of the same character.




120
         Defects of level indicators sensors

             The BR-5/10 reactor pump level indicators sensors are made of stainless steel tube
        20 mm in diameter and with wall thickness of 0.2 mm. They are divided into sections
        to which current collectors are welded. Leaks took place through cracks formed in
        joint welds of these sections. After improving the joint welding technology of current
        collectors there were no cases of level indicating sensors. On the rest of the reactors
        the level indicators of other design are used. No leaks due to such cause occurred.

         Uncertain cause

             The cause of one of the leaks remained uncertain. At the BN-350 a rupture of the
        electromagnetic pump channel wall of the secondary circuit auxiliary system. A
        possible cause of this event was corrosion resulting from prolonged operation of the
        pump at pumping of coolant strongly contaminated with sodium-water interaction
        products.

             Thus, of the total number of 61 considered leaks about one third of all the cracks
        that occurred resulted from erroneous actions of operating or repair personnel. About
        one half of cracks occurred at repair or start-up activities or at the sodium preparation
        system (i.e., at the system which in no way is related with reactor safety).

              From 27 sodium leaks which occurred during the BN-600 NPP operation the
        most of them have been small leaks: in 21 cases the amount of poured out sodium did
        not exceed 10 kg. In the rest 6 cases, the amounts of sodium released were 30, 50,
        300, 600, 650, and 1000 kg. Table 1.1. gives the main characteristics of large (over 10
        kg) sodium leaks.




             Table 1.1. Main characteristics of large sodium leaks in BN-600
Date of leak         Location          Detection method           Cause of leak        Amount of
                                                                                       Na leaked
  13.01.80        Sodium receipt       lonization smoke        Flange joint failure       50kg
                      system               detectors
 11.08.81        SG valve sealing       Electric heaters       Flange joint failure      300kg
                                     monitoring, ionization
                                           detectors
 02.07.82        SG valve sealing    Visually by personnel     Flange joint failure      30kg
 31.12.90            SG drain           Electric heaters         Manufacturing           600kg
                     pipeline                                        failure
 07.10.93        Primary sodium        Electric heaters,        Insufficient self-       1000 kg
                   purification       radioactive aerosol       compensation of
                      system              monitoring                pipelines
 06.05.94           ffiX drain       Visually by personnel      Pipeline cutting         650kg
                     pipeline                                   before sodium is
                                                                     frozen



                                                                                             121
     Sodium fires occurred in 14 cases. All leaks were detected in time by either
detection systems or the operators.
     The total number of leaks was distributed between the components as follows:
     - sodium receipt system          5
     - SG modules shut off valves      5
     - secondary auxiliary systems     12
     - primary auxiliary systems       5
     In order to confine and extinguish fires of non- radioactive sodium, powders were
used. It was only in case of large leak and fire of primary (radioactive) sodium when
the algorithm of sodium burning consequences confinement adopted in the power unit
design was realized. This algorithm proved its value: the radioactivity release was
much lower as compared to the permissible value. The draining type fire extinguishing
systems were not used since there was no need.


1.2. Sodium leak and fire detection systems

     Several different systems of the sodium leaks and fires detection used at our
domestic reactors can be considered as an example of the BN-600 reactor where the
positive experience of such systems operation has been taken into account.
     In the BN-600 several leak and fire detection system types are used, namely:
     - the electric heater earthing detection system;
     - the radioactive sodium aerosol detection system,
     - the smoke detection system;
     - the system for gaseous medium temperature measurement within sodium-
       containing premises.
     In Fig. 1 the lay-out of electric heaters and thermal insulation on sodium piping is
shown. The heaters have 100% reserve. Earthing of the main and stand-by heaters is
continuously monitored. Leaking sodium creates an electric contact between the heater
and the pipe wall. Simultaneous failure of both the operating and stand-by heaters is
indicative of a sodium leak. Such systems have been installed at all our fast reactors.
Their operation experience has shown high reliability and sensitivity of such systems.




                1. Pipeline                        3. Thermal insulation
                2. Electric heaters               4. Jacket of thermal insulation

                FIG. 1. Layout of electric heaters and thermal insulation on pipeline.


 122
      There are two versions of the sodium leak detection systems based on the
 radioactivity detection principle:
      - taking gas samples from the monitored area, pumping them through the aerosol
         filter and measuring the filter radioactivity;
      - measuring radioactivity of air at the exhaust ventilation pipe of the monitored
        area (radiometer sensor is placed directly on ventilation piping).
     The first version of such system is presented in Fig. 2. The air samples from the
 exhaust ventilation pipeline are pumped through a special aerosol filter where sodium
 aerosols are accumulated. The radiometer measures the filter radioactivity and
 generates a signal at an excess of some specified level. This system showed very high
 operating characteristics.
     Large sodium fires can be also detected by the gaseous-medium temperature
 monitoring systems of the rooms.
     Besides, for monitoring of sodium ingress into some cavities the spark-plug-type
 sensors are used.




           2 ——'



S / S / 'S/fSf/f S / / S S S / ff/               ff / f // S/S///////S

 1. Pipe of exhaust ventilation system         5. Sensor of radiometer system
 2. Sampling tube inlet                         6. Secondary radiometer system
 3. Valves                                        7. Fan
 4. Aerosol filter


                      FIG. 2. Sodium aerosol detection system.




         1.3, Sodium fire extinguishing systems

      Sodium fire prevention and extinguishing measures are mainly provided by the
 passive means. First of all, these are reactor guard vessel and jackets covering pipeline
 sections attached to the reactor up to the shut off valves, as well as the main secondary
 sodium pipeline sections from the IHX to the reactor cell wall. The space between the
 main and guard vessels is filled with the inert gas preventing sodium from burning in
 case of leak.

                                                                                      123
      Self-extinguishing method based on the oxygen burning out resulting in the
termination of burning of the sodium released into the air filled closed space is widely
used. In order to realize this method, pans with covers are installed in the critical cells.
The pans are equipped with the devices allowing sodium to penetrate inside but
preventing the air oxygen from penetration.
     The self-extinguishing method is applied conformably to the whole cells. These
cells are made to some extent leak tight (the integrity of the cells is characterized by
the leak rate of to 100% or 20% of the cell volume per hour if the cell vacuum is
respectively 50 mm and 10 mm water column). This prevents oxygen leaking to the
cell from outside so that its content in the cell atmosphere is lowered down to the fire
extinguishing value. Using certain algorithm of the ventilation system operation
pressure rise in the cell caused by the sodium fire is limited, and directed release of the
aerosols to the atmosphere through the special filtering system is provided. This
algorithm is as follows (see Fig. 3):
               valves on the incoming ventilation ducts are closed;
               valves on the exhaust ducts of the emergency ventilation system are
          opened, while the regular ventilation valves are closed;
               emergency exhaust system fan is put into operation.
     Besides, draining type systems are provided for the sodium fire extinguishing. This
approach is based on the use of a tank located below the cell where the large sodium
leaks are probable. A membrane made of material with low melting point is provided
over the tank inlet nozzle. The poured out sodium melts the membrane and flows by
gravity to the drain tank to be extinguished because of the lack of oxygen.
     The active methods of fire extinguishing use the forced delivery of extinguishing
media and materials to the area of fire origin. In some cases, for the small cells
nitrogen delivery is envisaged. In the cells with non-radioactive sodium transportable
fire-extinguishers are used. Also, fixed powder fire extinguishing systems are provided.




                                                                       ———— —       forced air pipeline

                                                                               3    inlet cell

                                                                                    blower

                                                                                    sodium aerosol filter


                                                                                   HEPA type filter

  I_ . __                                                                          electric driven valve
                                                                                    swing check valve
                                                                                   sodium aerosol detection
                                                                                   system


                     FIG. 3. Scheme of primary sodium room ventilation system.

124
      In order to eliminate direct contact of sodium with concrete structures, inner
 surface of the cell walls is lined with steel. Thermal effect of the sodium on the
 concrete is moderated by the thermal insulation layers, placed between the concrete
 and steel lining.

          1.4. Sodium leak and fire detection systems operation

      Experience with sodium leaks at our domestic reactors indicates that all leaks
 without exception, were timely detected. All leaks that occurred on the electrically
 heated sodium system sections were registered by heaters control systems. In addition,
 primary sodium leaks were sensed by the radioactive sodium aerosol detection
 systems. Calculation and experimental analysis of the radioactive sodium aerosol
 detection system has revealed its high sensitivity and fast response.
      In some cases (mainly at sodium valve bellows leakages) the contact leakage
 detectors (of a spark-plug type) came into action.
      Operation experience of sodium leak and fire detection systems indicate that
 design solutions on these systems have been made properly.


         2. ANALYSIS OF LEAKS IN STEAM GENERATORS OF THE BN-600
 NPP

       2.1. Steam generator of the BN-600 NPP and protection system against
   secondary circuit overpressure

       The steam generator (SG) of the BN-600 NPP is once-through sectional heat
exchanger. It involves eight parallel sections, connected with each other by the sodium,
water, high pressure steam and reheated steam pipelines. SG is equipped with auxiliary
pipelines for sodium filling and draining, gas relief, etc. Shut off valves are provided on
the inlet and outlet sodium and water-steam pipelines of each SG section in order to
isolate the failed section with the rest ones remaining in operation if necessary. In
accordance with the "Requirements...", SG operation with six sections is permitted.
       Each section consists of three modules: evaporator (EV), superheater (SH) and
reheater (RH) (see Fig. 4). All modules are vertical, straight tube heat exchangers with
the lens type compensators of thermal expansion provided on the vessels.
       Also, SG involves compensator tank (CT), start-up equipment (two sets for each
SG), SG protection system (SGPS), as well as auxiliary technological systems ensuring
SG operation in all modes. The SG is equipped with electric heaters, thermal
insulation, and necessary instrumentation.
       SGPS was designed to provide safe and reliable operation of the steam generator
and the whole power unit in case of water/steam leak in the steam generator.
       It was taken into consideration when SGPS design was developed to use to the
maximum extent the advantages of SG sectional design, namely the possibility of
detection of failed section or module at the early stage of the leak development, and
isolation of the failed item, i.e. keeping the rest part of the steam generator in
operation, on condition that of the isolated item safety is guaranteed.
       SGPS includes several subsystems to perform the following tasks:
       - leak detection and failed section identification using the set of appropriate
 devices;



                                                                                      125
      FIG. 4. Section of the BN-600 steam generator.
              1 — superheater, 2 — evaporator, 3 — reheater


126
       - isolation of the failed section from the rest part of SG remained in operation,
taking measures for limitation of water (steam) amount penetrating into the sodium
circuit;
       - discharge and separation of reaction products;
       - drying of failed section on the tertiary circuit side and filling with nitrogen.
      Leak detection in the steam generator is made using the following methods and
instruments:
       - IVA-1 indicator of hydrogen content in sodium at the outlet of each section;
       - iKAV-7 conductivity apparatus monitoring hydrogen content in the CT gas
volume;
       - ITI [ and ISHIT , systems detecting gas phase appearance in the sodium
flowing through the SG relief pipelines and HBA-1 inlet sodium pipeline;
       - standard pressure sensors indicating pressure rise in the CT;
       - standard magnetic flowmeters (300 mm diameter) indicating the increase of the
sodium flow rate at the section outlet.
       On the basis of the data received from sensors, the indication subsystem forms
"large leak" and "small leak" emergency signals using special algorithms.
       Also, the recorded information on technological parameters is used in addition to
the above data when analyzing leak in the SG.
       The isolation of failed section is carried out by closing the following valves:
       - gate valves on the sodium inlet pipelines of the superheater and reheater
modules and sodium outlet pipelines of the evaporator modules;
         - gate valves on the feed water and steam pipelines of the evaporator modules
  and on both inlet and outlet steam pipelines of the superheater and reheater modules.
         Discharge and separation of water-sodium interaction products is carried out by
  using set of tanks after operation of rupture disc devices (yTJM-200) installed in the
 CT. Two such devices with the flapping rupture discs using passive action principle,
 are provided for each SG. The disc is broken spontaneously when 0.245 MPa gauge
 pressure value is achieved in the CT. The separation of gaseous and condensed
 reaction products is made in CT and first stage discharge tank (DT-1), separated gas
 entering the second stage discharge tank (DT-2) through 600 mm diameter pipeline.
 Two pulse safety valves of 400 mm diameter are installed on the DT-2 in order to
 release gas into the atmosphere if the permissible pressure value (0.15 MPa) is
 exceeded. These valves can be urged into the open position by increasing pressure of
 the working medium in the special piston chamber over 0.03 MPa. The working
 medium taken from DT-2 is supplied to the piston chamber by opening the auxiliary 25
 mm diameter valve with electromagnetic drive. The medium is taken from DT-2 to the
 pulse valve.
       After the evaporator and superheater modules have been isolated, their drying on
 the tertiary circuit side is carried out by forced opening of the discharge devices with
 the subsequent filling of dried modules with nitrogen.
        In case of the SG shutdown, steam is removed from the reheater module to the
 turbine condenser via intermediate pressure cylinder, while in case of single section
 shutdown, draining pipelines are used for this purpose.
       Protection of the steam generator and secondary circuit against the overpressure
 in case of water/steam leak is provided by the following measures:
        - in case of "small leak" signal formation, isolation of failed section on the
 operating steam generator is made by an instruction from the operator, with its drying
 on the tertiary circuit side;



                                                                                     127
       - in case of "large leak" signal formation, shut-down of steam generator is made
by an instruction from the operator with its drying on the tertiary circuit side;
       - in case of CT pressure exceeding 0.23 MPa value, automatical shut-down of
the steam generator on the operating power unit is made with its drying on the tertiary
circuit side;
       - in case of CT pressure exceeding 0.245 MPa value, spontaneous passive break
of the rupture disc and reaction products discharge through CT to DT-1 are realized.
       Since late 1981, the steam generators have been operated on the rated power
level with design parameters. Now, scheduled replacement of evaporator modules
having been in operation over 100 000 hours (i.e. those with expired life time) by the
new items have been complete in 1997. Operating experience of SGPS has
demonstrated its sufficiently high reliability. Water into sodium leaks (including large
ones) occurred in the steam generators only resulted in replacement of SG structural
elements in which the reaction took place. There haven't been any more serious
consequences of the steam generator failures. No serious failures of SGPS affecting
SG safety have occurred during the whole period of operation.


         2.2. Review of water/steam-to-sodium leak events in steam generators of the
      BN-600NPP

       The sectional-module SGs have demonstrated high operating robustness in the
event if inter-circuit leaks. During the entire period of SG operation there have been
twelve water/steam-to-sodium leak events, half of which occurred in the first year of
operation and were caused by development of latent manufacturing defects. Inter-
circuit leaks were mainly in the superheater modules (six events) and in the reheaters
(five events), while in the evaporators there was only one leak event (Table 2.2).
       In spite of the leaks occurred in the steam generators module and section SG
design has proved its advantages by providing planned rate of the reactor power
gaining and high performance. Average value of load factor for the period from reactor
initial start-up till 1996 was 69.3%. Steam generators with related systems have not
caused any load factor decrease during the last five years.


             2.3. Description of large leak in the BN-600 superheater on 19 January,
      1982

     The power unit was put into operation after some scheduled maintenance about
two months before the leak occurred, and its operation was stable on 90-100 % power
level. By the time of the leak appearance three loops were in operation, the unit power
being equal to 93.6%.
     No. 5 steam generator performance at the time of leak:
     - sodium temperature at the SG inlet            492 °C
                        at the SG outlet             298 °C
     - fresh steam pressure                           11.2 MPa
     - fresh steam temperature                        489 °C
     - SG steam capacity                              463 t/hour
     Reheater module of 5B1 section of the steam generator was shut down. All
detectors of water-into-sodium leaks were serviceable and they were in operation.


128
Table 2.2. Water into sodium leaks and leak detection system operation on the BN-600 steam generators.

^s.     No of leak

 Parame-^v.                 1          2          3           4          5          6          7         8         9         10          11        12
 ters at the ^\^
 time of leak       ^\
  1 Modules                RH          SH        RH           SH        SH         SH         SH         SH        EV        RH          SH        RH
 2 Leak size                L           L         S            S         S          S          L          S         S         S           S         S
 3 Date of leak         24 06 80    04 07 80   24 08 80    08 09 80   20 10 80   090681     1901 82   22 07 83   06 1184   10 1184    24 02 85   240191
 4 Time of work before
 failure, hours           1000        968        1145       1454        950       1640       4019      19584     26032      14512      26078     44000*'
 5 NPP electric power,
 MWe                      270         65         313         362        332        210       550        606       240       600         400       596
 6 Secondary Na
 temperatures ( SG
 inlet/ outlet), JC     460/300     314/299    465/300     468/298    460/299    401/300    500/301   506/304    510/305   510/305    480/300    513/315
 7 Tertiary circuit
 parameters,
      feet water
 temp , JC                156                    162         163        159        159        164       164       238       240         163       240
      temp of
 live/reheated
 steam °C               440/432                450/453     461/453    456/447    307/187    490/483   501/493    504/497   506/496    470/462    504/499
 -SH/RH pressure
 (MPa)                   112/10        .       10 8/0 92   103/131    11/103     5 5/0 36   112/22    12 1/2 2    12/22    12 1/2 2   119/28     119/21
 8 Time to reach
 emergency value
 setting, nun               .          .          4           5          8          5          2         7          9         .          5         45
 9 Water into
  sodium leak flow                                                    0 0064-
 rate,g/s                002-6     0 1-0615    009-15      02-03       -023        140       250         -         0-3      002         0 14       46
  10 Amount of water
 escaped into secondary
 circuit, kg               40        1787         7          0 18       078        40        20 3       Ill        18       075         073        83

      *) After repair work had been completed on the module failed in case 10
Background values of hydrogen content in sodium and in gas were respectively (0.08 -
0.15)- 10'6 and 0.016 vol.%.
     At 16:11 on January 19, 1982, signal of IVA device indications increase was
observed in 5B1 section. No indication changes were detected in other monitoring
devices. Operator was sent to the IVA device area in order to check its indications.
     At 16:15, abrupt increase of indications of all IVA devices installed on the outlet
of the SG-5 all sections started (it should be taken into account that the period of
sodium flow through the circuit is about 2 minutes). However indications of ITI,
ISFQT and KAV-7 devices did not change, causing some doubt with respect to the
IVA's indication growth, and the latter was explained by erroneous actions of I&C
man sent to the local control board.
     Later, it was revealed that ITI device had indicated "leak" twice (at 16:12 and at
16:20), but these were two outline points on the recorder, missed by the personnel.
Though, according to the instruction in force at that time signals of such a kind should
not be taken into account.
     At 16:23, ISHIT system showed "leak" in 5B1 section. At the same time, pressure
increase started in the pressure compensator vessel. All these signals were perceived by
the personnel as a large leak indication, and SG-5 was shut down at 16:24 using "large
leak" switch with automatic realization of the emergency algorithm (shutdown of the
main sodium pump and drying out of SG on the water side).
     At 16:30, indications of KAV-7 device increased abruptly beyond the scale (by
5%). According to the indications of IVA device installed on the failed section,
hydrogen content there reached 30- 10"6 value, while it was (3-5) • W6 in other
sections.
     After decreasing its power down to 64% the reactor remained in operation on two
loops, but 4.5 days later the third loop (except for the failed section) was put in
service.

     Retrospective analysis of indications of SG-5 leak detection devices and other
system parameters made it possible to recreate the following picture of the process:
     - at 16:10, steam into sodium leak of 60- 100 g/min flow rate occurred in the
superheater, resulting in the increase of the SG section pressure drop on the secondary
sodium side and about 2% sodium flow rate decrease from the initial value; IVA
indications growth in this section began 1 minute later (Fig. 5);
     - during 13 minutes, steam leak flow rate increased up to 500 g/min, while sodium
flow rate in the section continued to decrease (see Fig. 6), maximum reduction being
16.5% from the initial value, and sodium flow rate through the other sections increased
by 30% as compared to the initial level;
     - at 16:23, an abrupt increase of the leak up to 15000 g/min occurred resulting in
the rapid formation of hydrogen bubble in the module and pushing sodium into the
headers. Sodium flow rate at the failed section outlet increased by 1.35 times; sodium
level in the pressure compensator increased by 250 mm. Rupture disc installed on the
pressure compensator burst spontaneously at 0.18 MPa pressure value;
     - after "large leak" automatic algorithm had been initiated, both SG and secondary
loop were shut down and SG was dried out.
     In the course of shutdown, steam pressure in the section was reduced down to 0.6
MPa during 50s using safety valves, with their subsequent closure.
     Six minutes after SG shutdown both inlet and outlet sodium valves of the
suspected section were closed, and its draining started. During 1 hour, 17 m3 of
sodium was drained, and plugging of the evaporator drain piping was revealed.


130
                               5    '     10                                                         ,   min
                             16 o'clock

                                                               Time of 19 January 1982

                             FIG. 5. Behaviour of hydrogen content in sodium caused by SG-5 leak.

               I
        1.9
                                          Sodium flow rate (average) from non-failed sections
       31.6    1000                         Gas pressure in compensator vessel


        1.3 800
                                            Sodium flow rate from 5B1 section


1200    1.0 600


1000    0.7      400

                                                  Sodium level in compensator vessel
 800     0.4 -200


 600     O.I
                        5'                      10                          15                  20                  25   f , min
                      16 o'clock
                                                                                                         SG-5 shutdown
                                                                 Time of the day

                               FIG. 6. Change of secondary circuit parameters caused by SG-5 leak.

                                                                                                                          131
     Eight minutes after SG shutdown, water valves at the module inlet were closed,
while outlet valves were closed in ten minutes. Then steam replacement with nitrogen
was initiated.
     Evaluation of steam amount penetrated into the secondary circuit was made using
final values of hydrogen content in sodium and gas as well as gas volume increase.
This steam amount was 20.3 kg, including 5.4 kg of water penetrated during initial 13
minutes after leak start and the rest 14.9 kg penetrated during SG outage. Besides, in
spite of rapid supply of nitrogen into the water circuit, about 200 kg of sodium entered
the module lower chamber and outlet steam piping.

     All IVA-1 devices of SG-5 detected steam ingress in sodium and leak evolution.
Other systems failed to operate, that resulted in hampering and delaying decision on
the SG shutdown:
     - KAV-7 gas analyzer reaction to hydrogen appearance in pressure compensator
vessel was correct, but sufficient hydrogen content was reached there already after the
SG had been shutdown;
     - both ITI and ISHIT systems responded to the steam leak, although their
response was short, so neither "leak" signal was formed, nor any signal was put out to
the operator's display. This in particular was because of the imperfection of the signal
processing algorithm.

     Experience gained on this and some other leaks has shown that ITI system
operation strongly depends on hydraulic mode of the secondary circuit and leak
location. Later on, experimental studies and analysis of this system performance were
carried out, thus allowing to refine its role in the set of leak indication devices.
     "Large leak" signal based on gas pressure increase in the pressure compensator
vessel was not put out because of burst of the rupture disc that had happened before
pressure safety settings were reached in the compensator vessel. Absence of displayed
information and KAV-7 gas analyzer and ITI system responses which were habitual in
connection with the previous leaks, as well as unusually rapid growth of IVA-1
indications similar to that in case of device failure - all this made personnel doubt in the
correctness of these devices. As a result of this, personnel did not manage to
understand the situation and decision on the SG shutdown was made with delay.
     After additional attributes had appeared confirming leak occurrence, personnel
began to act in more positive, proper and timely manner, so that no further
propagation of the leak was allowed.

    Identification of the failed module was made by in-turn pressurization of the SG
modules water side with nitrogen, its pressure decrease being monitored. Tests
revealed superheater failure of 5B1 section.
    After its draining the module was pressurized with air, and 7 failed tubes were
revealed in the central area of the tube bundle (Fig. 7). In the course of dismantling of
the tube bundle it was shown that through defects, i.e. local thinning of the tube walls
caused by metal dissolution were found on tube sections between spacer grids at about
6500 mm distance from the upper tube plate (Fig. 8). Wall thickness decrease was
revealed on two more tubes. Metallurgical defect of the tube wall, which had not been
revealed on the stage of incoming gauging, and which manifested during operation,
could be the cause of the initial leak in this case.
    Repair works were devoted to the replacement of failed module with the new one.



132
                                                /                 i r i i                                     v
                        ii14— ——— -/- —— 4 4 4 4 '4 4 4 4 + ——\ ——— 13
                              ——-f- —— 4 -{-4-4--|-4-4\4.4.4.  \    23
                        24
                        37         — 7 ^ - 4 4 4 4 4 4 + 4 - 4 - 4 4 4 4-\—" 36
                        C.T        —f ~ t- 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 - + 4- 4- + -4- 4-—\ — SO"
                        66 "                                                                                              81
                                           t                                 - - 4- + + + 4-                              96
                        97
                        113                                                   4 4 4 4 + + 4-
                                   —— 4                                                                                    127
                       128                                                                                                 143
                                   —444444444444 + 4++ 4-
                       144                                                                                                J158_
                       159         i— 4444444444
                                      "*               + + + ++—
                                                                                                                           177
                       175
                                        + +++ + + + 4444+ + + +
                                                                                                                           189
                       190                                                                                                203
                       204           •x-4- +444444444 + + 4-7
                                         >____L     -L. _L _L _L _L     I    I       I   I        i       i       i   /   216
                                          A •+ +-4+4.+4444444444444++-+ +-                                                226
                       227                      N. - 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 + +-                                                   235
                       236 .
                                                            444



                                            -   tube having through defect


                                  FIG. 7. Cartogram of failed tube locations in 5SB1 module.




Upper tube plate
                                         aex>
                                                                                 I                    2
                        ^276        ^i
                                                                                         /                    \
                                                                                                                                   tube 89, row !

                                                                                                                                      tube I03J

                                                                                                                                     tube IW\
                                                                                                                           1        tube 105        9
                                                                                             40
                                                                                                                                     tube ijg"

            •.                                                                                                                       tube 120 > row
                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                               -     tube 121
                 5900
   "* I 1
   "*            1 1
                        6190                                                         \
                                                                                         \
                                           1 - Spacer locations                                           defect
                                           2 - Spacer grids



                               FIG. 8. Locations of through defects in the tubes of2SBl module.


                                                                                                                                                  133
        2.4. Improvement of steam generator protection system

        Considerable modifications of SGPS in BN-600 NPP were made during the
operation period:
        - in order to prevent gas entrainment, sodium level in CT was increased,
resulting in decrease of the gas compensating volume from 18 m3 to 14.5 m3;
        - flapping rupture discs based on passive principle were installed instead of
forced rupture discs;
        - number of discharge pipelines from CT to DT-1 was decreased from four to
two;
        - pipelines of sodium relief from SG modules were modified in order to provide
continuous sodium flow;
        - ISHIT ' sensors were installed on the modified relief piping to monitor water
into sodium leaks in each module (especially, in the vicinity of upper tube sheets);
        - algorithms of "small leak" and "large leak" signals formation were modified (in
particular, the readings of 300 mm diameter magnetic flow meters installed at the
outlet of each SG section, were introduced for making "large leak" signal);
        - in order to decrease transport time of the analyzed gas sample to the sensor,
the gas flow rate through the KAV-7 device was increased from 3 1/hr to 12 1/hr.
      Experience gained in BN-600 SG operation has been taken into account in the
BN-800 SG design. It is for the first time in the home design practice that the BN-800
steam generator is equipped with double-level safety system for the case of tube failure
causing water leak
      The first level system which is usually called automatic safety system (ASS) is
actually preliminary protection stage. It is designed for failed SG section location on
the early stage and its shut-down, steam generator being kept in operation on full or
lowered power (depending on specific situation). This system provides automatic
draining of isolated section on both sodium and water sides. Algorithm of automatic
shut-down of the failed section provides its independent simultaneous isolation on both
sodium and water sides, followed by opening of discharge paths.
      In case of rated (design) leak process evolution, only the first level safety system
should operate.
      The second level, i.e. the general protection stage provides the whole steam
generator isolation and its drying out on the water side, as well as protection of the
 secondary circuit against overpressure.
      In case of emergency, SG is shut down using automatic algorithm. Related signal
is formed on cover gas pressure increase in the pressure compensator vessel (PCV) up
to the alarm setting. If one of safety rupture discs bursts spontaneously before the
 alarm setting is reached, the algorithm is initiated by the gas pressure decrease signal.
      Algorithm initiation and SG shut-down control are fulfilled automatically. In case
 of failure of algorithm automatic operation, SG should be shut down by operator.
      Algorithm of the SG emergency shut-down includes the following procedures:
       1) shut-down of secondary sodium pump and closure of quick-acting and shut-off
 valves installed on the SG water circuit common pipelines;
      2) automatic steam discharge from SG through the safety valves, installed on the
 discharge header - after valves closure according to 1);
      3) automatic or remotely controlled drying out of both SG and feed water route
 using draining pipelines - after valves closure according to 1);
      4) automatic closure of sodium valves installed at the inlet of SG sections;
       5) remote nitrogen supply to the water side of the SG.


134
     Analysis of the BN-800 reactor SG and related safety system design have shown
that there are some approaches adopted to prevent propagation of dangerous situation
similar to that occurred on the PFR:
     - devices for leak detection, using various principles and duplicating each other to
some extent (this is to facilitate leak detection on the early stage);
     - most components of the SG safety system are backed up, and in case of
preliminary safety system stage failure to shut down SG section, the whole steam
generator is shut down;
     - reliable coolant release from both secondary and water circuit is provided.
     It is very important, that according to the established rules of operation of both
BN-350 and BN-600 power units, safety devices and related instruments can only be
switched off for a short time with the intensification of the SG performance monitoring
by the operator for this period.


     3. ANOMALOUS EVENT ON THE BN-600 REACTOR CAUSED BY
IMPURITIES TRANSFER IN THE PRIMARY CIRCUIT

        3.1. Analysis of impurities behaviour in the primary circuit

     Maintaining required purity of the coolant and cover gas is a necessary condition
for successful operation of any reactor facility. In case of sodium cooled reactor these
requirements are determined by Specifications on sodium coolant for nuclear reactors
(TV - 6 - 01 - 788 - 73) and Rules of the BN-600 reactor operation. They are most
rigid for the primary circuit, since nuclear safety of the reactor is immediately
concerned.
    Content of impurities in the coolant is determined by the source/release rate
relationship in the system. Not only ingress and removal of impurities from the coolant
(in more general sense - from the system) should be understood as sources and
releases, but all processes influencing forms of impurities existence.
     Under normal operating conditions of the reactor on power, the main sources of
impurities entering the coolant are as follows:
     - structural materials corrosion products;
     - cover gas supplied to the system in the process of system replenishment or
necessary procedures;
     - lubrication system of centrifugal pumps;
     - hydrogen and tritium, produced in the steam generator and in the core, entering
the coolant owing to diffusion.
     Analysis of behaviour of structural materials corrosion products in the BN-600
type commercial reactor has shown that the main amount of corrosion products (which
can reach ~100 kg/year if oxygen content is ~10 ppm) is not removed by the cold traps
but accumulated in the circuit as deposits to all appearance mainly on the heat
exchanger tubes. Their genesis in the process of long-term operation of the reactor
plant requires carrying out special studies. The main attention should be paid to the
issue of their possible mass ingress into the coolant and development of measures
preventing from negative consequences of such event if there is any probability of it.
     During 1981-1984 period, average amount of argon supplied to the reactor cover
gas plenum (CGP) was ~ 4 • 103 nm3/year, while during maintenance work period,
from 2.5 to 68 m3 of air entered the circuit (evaluations were made on the basis of
nitrogen content increase in the CGP). As a result of this, up to 6 kg/year of oxygen


                                                                                     135
entered the circuit, water amount being ~ 0.5 kg/year. The most portion of these
impurities was brought when some works were carried out on the reactor.
     According to the evaluations made by the pump designers, rate of the oil ingress
into the circuit does not exceed 60 g per year from each pump.
     The range of sources of the impurities extends if any maintenance or emergency
works are carried out, and their capacity sometimes increases several orders.
     Impurities release is possible through the following equipment:
     - purification systems, such as cold traps;
     - circuit sections, where accumulation of impurities is possible because of
hydrodynamic and temperature conditions (thermodynamic parameters).
     In the latter case the following systems can be taken as examples: stagnation zones
in the bottom of reactor vessel and sodium/structural material and gas/structural
material interfaces.
     In the analysis of probable distribution of impurities in the primary circuit,
complicated structure of the BN-600 reactor should be taken into account, namely the
fact that several hundreds of the components having various operating temperatures
and thermodynamic parameters, are located in the reactor vessel. Under nominal
operating conditions, temperature difference in the sodium circuit reaches 200°C value.
Taking into account that in spite of the designers' efforts some stagnation zones still
exist in such complicated system, and these zones are very slightly involved in the
process of mass transfer with the bulk of sodium, conclusion can be made on that the
real temperature difference in the reactor vessel exceeds 200°C.
     When there is no coolant flow in the circuit, temperature difference along the main
route of sodium is insignificant. However under these conditions, the risk of stagnation
zones appearance in the vicinity of the vessel bottom is high. It should be taken into
account in the analysis of this phenomenon, that "cold" sodium from the cold trap
enters lower section of the reactor vessel and both reactor pit and reactor guard vessel
are cooled permanently by air.
     These factors create prerequisites for impurities accumulation in the zones with
limited mass transfer to the main sodium flow, namely surface of cover gas plenum of
the reactor and possible stagnation zones. At the same time, corrosion products would
deposit on the non-isothermal surfaces of the intermediate heat exchanger until the
certain moment determined by the critical thickness of deposits layer.
     These points should be taken into account when analysing unusual behaviour of
impurities, considered below.
     Some features of impurities behaviour in the BN-600 reactor primary circuit are
observed during reactor transients, such as increase of temperature and power, shut-
down/start-up modes of the loops, reactor scram etc.
     In November-December 1981, one of the early cases of abnormal behaviour of
plugging meter temperature (referring to the content of impurities soluble in the
coolant) was detected. Parameters of the system prior to this event and their further
evolution are shown in Fig. 12. The increase of the coolant temperature was preceded
by various procedures related to the replacement of the primary components. These
resulted in the ingress of large amount of air into the CGP. In the course of this work,
sodium was purified using cold trap, and the plugging temperature was always lower
than that of the flowing sodium, this difference being over 100°C just before the
increase of temperature.
     Stable growth of the plugging temperature was detected after 325°C value had
been reached. Further temperature increase resulted in several times higher rate of the
plugging temperature growth. During the first half of the day of December 1, ingress


136
rate was over 150 g/hour in terms of hydrogen. After purification system capacity had
been increased over two times, plugging temperature started to decrease, and it took
eight days to complete purification of the total amount of the coolant which passed
four times through the cold traps. No abnormalities have been detected during further
on-power operation of all primary system components.
     By now, monitoring of non-metal impurities behaviour in the primary circuit and
their possible effect on other parameters of the sodium coolant (temperatures, flow
rates and levels) has been set up on the regular basis.
     For instance, in some cases of the cold condition reactor start-up, hydrogen
content in the reactor cover gas increases from 0.0005 to 0.3 vol. % within 220 -
380°C temperature range, followed by its stabilisation in the range from 380 to 400°C
and subsequent gradual decrease down to 0.05 vol.% with further temperature
increase up to 530-540° C. This type of hydrogen behaviour can be explained in the
following way: hydrogen content growth is obviously caused by the hydroxide
decomposition and sodium hydride dissociation, taking place at considerable rate in the
temperature range from 280 to 360°C, while the reduction of hydrogen content in the
cover gas is resulted from the reverse process, since the rate of hydrogen interaction
with sodium surface increases at temperatures over 380 - 400°C.
     Hydrogen containing impurities can penetrate into sodium during refuelling
operations when fresh fuel is loaded into the core, and also in the course of
maintenance and components replacement works. Specific reactor operating modes
and stagnation zones favour deposits accumulation in the line ends, although sodium
purification in the cold traps is carried out permanently during reactor refuelling.
     If at least one loop or the reactor is shut down^ hydrogen and nitrogen content
increase is sometimes observed in the cover gas. For instance, in February 1989, when
one loop was shut down followed by the reactor scram, contents of hydrogen and
nitrogen increased respectively from 2 • 10"4 vol.% to 3.2 • 10"3 vol.% and from 0.03 to
0.05 vol. %. The origin of these phenomena has not yet been discovered, and studies
on impurities behaviour in the reactor are going on.

        3.2.   Description of abnormality

     During the BN-600 reactor operation, spontaneous abrupt changes of the
parameters occurred related to some operating modes. One of the sources of these
parameter changes could be the changes of hydraulic characteristics of the primary
circuit caused by the process of non-metal impurities transfer in sodium.
     It was shown by the BN-600 reactor operating experience, that not a single
change of the reactor parameters having been observed since the reactor was put into
operation resulted in the effect on the core processes, except for the event occurred on
21 January, 1987. However, there were no abnormal operating conditions in all these
cases including the above-mentioned event.
     On January 21, 1987, No.3 power unit of Beloyarskaya NPP was in operation on
the power level of ~ 96.6%.
     During the period from 14:29 to 14:36, spontaneous change of some reactor
parameters was detected (Figs. 9-11). This resulted in redistribution of power between
the primary loops without any change of reactor thermal power (there were no
changes in the current readings of ionisation chambers). This, in its turn, caused slight
redistribution of electric load of the turbine generators. There were the following
changes of the reactor parameters during this period (6 minutes):



                                                                                    137
      - automatic insertion of AP-1 control rod into the core to the depth of 90 mm (~
65 mm during the first minute and ~25 mm during the next ~4 minutes);
      - increase of the cover gas pressure by about 5% with its further decrease to the
initial value;
      - sodium level fluctuations in the reactor vessel within ±50 mm, followed by its
stabilisation on the level of 25 mm below the initial value;
      - increase of sodium level in the primary pump tanks by 50-^140 mm;
      - reduction of power consumed by the primary pumps by 1.5+2%;

                                 21.01.87                                30.01.87               16.02.u-.                      13.Oi.88
                       14:28       14:47 16:00                             16:36                  11:48                          15:23                       10:49
                        i            i     i
                                                                                                                                                            519


          tNa    °C                                                                                   5(6
          tR ,
                                                                             505
      r
          , kPa

Location AC, mm
                                                            N    0,2255 during 10:50, 21.01.8?


Concentration H2
in reactor pro- 2 10
tective gas, %                                                  \     °, 1% during 24:00, 21.01.87
                                     IS.W                                           - - -JTTT - - _
  Q^a, m3/lrr             *£1^
                         42-ti      M7i                                                           ii<°      _                       i20a
                                                                                                                                                           3 ( 8 9 4MCP
Consumed                j      "~~—— - - -                                                        i|fcS               _             aai3                   3227    5MCP
power, kW             . \ 3111
                                  -^iofc^
                                   ^ —.—— — — —'
                                                 ___            — ----""""""""                                               ^^.
                                                                                                                                   ^21—1
                                                                                                                                       • -— _ _ .
                                                                                                                                                         « ,1 »
                                                                                                                                                       , oD   *•
                                                                                                                                                                 6MCP
                          lo(          7    ~ - ~ - -— - - - - _ _ _                        _         ageo ^ --"           ^ -"       2oi    ~~ ^~ - - _ M             41

Charge TG, MWJ ,97     \~~        ~^———^^192.
                                            ^               -                                         (90 ^
                                                                                                                ^''
                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                           ^"               ~~----           "99 K1
                                                                                                                                                           ———— 51

                       1        X    2.10 ~ ^ \ _ _ _ _ _                                                                           (9g5
                       i _£°' S                 £.Ofc           ~ - _ _ — __^                                             __ ^- -           ^__ _
                                                                                   ' ~ ~~ - - _ <3i.S ^ - - '                                                      61

                           F/G. 9. Reactor BN-600 parameters variations 21.01.87-26.02.88.


                            21.01.87                                30.01.87              16.02.87                        13.01.8                   26.02.8
                 14:28          14:47 16:00                          16:36                   11:48                         15:23                     10:49
                  i              '     i
                                                                                                                            ^ii^                             .mod.
                  i              ! 5 ?3         '                                                                                                    Jaa      19-18
                                                                                                                                                     567     .mod.
                                                                                             565 „•                                                 ——— T 14-15
                                                                                                                                                     f<S3    t raod.
                                                                     553

                                                                                                5bh

                                                                                                                                                             .mod.
                                                                                                                                                             ^17-09
 modules
                                                                                                      ~~ ~~ — -S^i
                                                                                                545
                                                                                                                                                             f mod.
                                                                                                                                                             ^12-05
                                                                                                                                                             .mod.
                                                                                                                                                             t
                                                                                                &                                                             1 3-04
                                                                                                                              560
                                                                                                                                                             *09-i7

                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                              .mod.
                                                                                                                                                               10-21
                                                                       52.1
                                                                                                                                                      027 4-mod.
                                                                                                                                                     ——— t) 4- 11
                                                                       51)


                             FIG. 10. Reactor BN-600 parameters variations 21.01.87-26.02.88.

138
                 - changes of sodium temperature at the SA outlet within ± 10°C (temperature
            increase was observed in the third sector, while it decreased in the first sector);
                 - changes of sodium temperatures at the intermediate heat exchangers inlet and
            outlet.
                 Further, reactor power was decreased down to 94.7% and then to 86% from the
            rated value.
                 The analysis of parameters showed, that ~0.031 % Ak/k positive reactivity had
            been inserted into the core during this period, while the core pressure drop increase
            and sodium flow rate decrease by ~2.5-=-3% took place.
                 All parameter changes were within the operational permissible limits, and they
            were easily compensated by the automatic control systems without intervention of the
            operators. Personnel support was only required on the water-steam circuit in order to
            bring parameters of No.6 turbine generator back to the normal values after all the
            transients were over (pressure regulator of TG No.6 was opened for pressure
            reduction in the controlled stage chamber of the turbine).
                 Impurities content measurement system operated on the periodical basis, so the
            first measurements of hydrogen content and plugging temperature were made
            respectively ~4 hours and ~ 2.5 hours later. Content increase values for hydrogen,
            nitrogen and helium were respectively ~ 0.22 vol.% (against usual value of ~2 • 10"4
            %), 0.06 vol.% and 0.03 vol. %, while the plugging temperature increased from 120°C
            to 155°C and then to 170°C (34 hours after start of the event). It is necessary to notice
            that this was the only case of changing contents of hydrogen, nitrogen and helium in
            the CGP under steady state conditions.
                 According to the evaluations, -90 g of hydrogen entered CGP, while ~ 110 g was
            added to the primary sodium, the total amount of hydrogen ingress being ~200g.



                                21.01.87              30.01.67             16.02.87         13.01.88   26.02.88
            j
                 14:28
                   .
                                14:47
                                  i
                                         I6;00         16:36                11:48            15:23      10:49
                                                                                                        532-

                                                                                 021 ,, *
4IHE J *4IHE-B——


                                                     - _£!§__
            4IHE-B                                  -._   3*5- _



        t in *
        t            its
            5IHE-A
                                                                                                       "7W
                                                                                 53?
                                                                                            552.        551
5IHE;                                                                                                   357
                                                 -— — _ sa? _ _ _ _ — -

                                                          i'lO _ _ _ _ - — — •




                                                          532 __- —

6IH                                                       SJi

                                                                                                        31$




                         FIG.     11. Reactor BN-600parameters variations 21.01.87-26.02.88.


                                                                                                               139
                       Q,m 3 /hr




                200




                ISO-




                   26. II          28   30   2.12 4             6     8.12.81



             FIG. 12. First circuit main parameters variations from 14.11.81-10.12.81
                     1 — reactor sodium temperature
                    2 —plugging temperature
                    3 — sodium flow rate for purification




Analysis of reactivity change showed that ~70 g of hydrogen was in the core (in order
to release reactivity value of ~|3(0.7 %Ak/k), ~2000 g of hydrogen should be
introduced to the core).
     Just after penetration of the impurities into the primary sodium, redundant cold
trap was put into operation. After ~10 days of two cold traps operation, the plugging
temperature was decreased down to 130°C. According to the evaluations made, about
6 kg of impurities in terms of sodium hydride was removed by the cold traps from the
circuit. This was in a good agreement with the evaluated amount of hydrogen brought
to the primary circuit (~90 g -into cover gas plenum, and -110 g - into sodium).
Positive reactivity was disappearing with sodium purification. By January 29, 1987,
hydrogen content in the CGP decreased down to -3.08 • 10"3 vol.%.

140
   Since the number of signals from the system of fuel element cladding integrity
monitoring (CBVI) based on gas activity and delay neutrons detection was
monotonously increasing, the reactor was shut down in March 1987 in order to detect
SA with failed fuel elements and to measure sodium flow rate through the
subassemblies located in the core and in-vessel storage (IVS).
     Below are the results of flow rate measurements. Sodium flow rate decreased by
2-12% in some subassemblies of the third sector, while in the most of tested TVS
subassemblies flow rate decrease was within 10-72% range. Considerable decrease,
namely over three times as compared to the design flow rate was revealed in eight IVS
subassemblies. These subassemblies were withdrawn partially (by 800 mm) using the
refuelling mechanism and then installed in their cells, by this recovering their flow rate.
Subassemblies were tested for integrity using special mechanism, and cladding failures
in the fuel and gas sections of the fuel elements were detected respectively in three and
five subassemblies. Testing subassemblies in the hot cell did not show any traces of
impurities deposits (these impurities might be removed during SA washing from
sodium).
     In the previous years of the reactor operation, no events similar to that of January
21, 1987, occurred. Reactor hydraulics and neutronics and primary system parameters
are within design limits.

    3.3. Analysis of causes and countermeasures for their elimination

     Analysis of parameters changes showed that carbon and hydrogen containing
substances penetrated into the primary sodium and deposited on the walls of SA feet
and core diagrid. This was the cause of the flow rate decrease through SA in some
sections of the reactor core.
     Hydrogen containing substances can penetrate into the sodium circuit during
maintenance operations and cover gas replenishment.
     The following versions of these substances location were considered:
     - solid impurities deposited on the walls of the primary circuit cover gas plenums;
     -accumulation of both solid and gaseous impurities in the stagnation zones under
support ring structure etc.
     In order to reveal specific causes of the anomalous event, a program of studies
was developed. This program envisaged sampling and analysis of impurities in the
deposits over the CGP walls and in the primary sodium, measurement of caesium
isotope activity in the reactor, studies on the impurities behaviour under conditions of
experimental facilities etc.
     Sodium sampling using standard device did not reveal any significant deviation of
impurities content in sodium from the normal value, except for one of four
measurements of carbon content (~150 ppm). In the course of measurements of
thermodynamic activity of carbon in sodium using method of equilibrium standard
samples, increase of activity from the background value of 2-10"2 to 5-10"2 was
detected after the event of January 21, 1987.
     It was rather difficult to make inspections and deposits sampling in the reactor
cover gas plenum because of its complicated configuration and small free space. It was
only possible to examine gas plenum of the refueling channel. The deposits over the
whole length of the channel shielding plug were revealed as well as the "beards" of 20
to 100 mm length hanging from its bottom. Analysis of these deposits samples showed
that they consisted mainly of sodium carbonate (80-85%), sodium hydroxide (4-5%)



                                                                                       141
and iron oxide (up to 2%). Since the sampling was made without using any special
protection means, some pollution of samples with impurities from air was probable.
     In order to make measurements of caesium-137 activity, special device containing
graphite pellet was installed in the loop connected in parallel to the primary sodium
purification system. Just after the event of January 21, 1987, some decrease of the
system indications was observed. Further, indications of the system came back to the
previous level, however, some feature in caesium behaviour was noticed. While in the
period preceding described events the decrease of the system indications in case of the
reactor shutdown and sodium temperature reduction down to 250°C was 30-40%,
later this decrease became as large as 10-12 times. After full power of the reactor had
been reached, sodium temperature being as high as 530-540°C, indications of caesium
activity measurement system returned to the rated level.
     Besides, these events were followed by redistribution of caesium-137 related
activity in the vicinity of the reactor vessel bottom.
     Probability of gas accumulation under the reactor support structures was
evaluated to be rather low.
     The most probable version is solid impurities deposition in the reactor cover gas
plenum during the previous 7 years of the reactor operation. This supposition was
confirmed by:
     - analysis of direct and accompanying indications of parameters and system
behaviour;
     - analysis of the primary sodium samples;
     - results of inspection of some structural elements and surfaces of gas plenums of
the primary components;
     - results of the hot cell SA inspection;
     - measurements of sodium flow rate in irradiated and fresh S A.
     However, in order to make final confirmation of this supposition additional studies
are required.
     The following countermeasures are taken against penetration of hydrogen
containing substances into the primary circuit:
     - drying of replenishment argon has been carried out;
     - devices for permanent monitoring of impurities content (and their analysis) in
the reactor CGP and primary sodium are under development;
     - some measures have been made in order to decrease gas leakage from the
reactor CGP, thus allowing minimisation of CGP replenishment rate.


     4. INCREASE OF TORQUE OF CENTRAL ROTATING COLUMN OF
THE BN-600 REACTOR

      During recent several years, growing increase of torque of the central rotating
column (CRC) has been observed within some angle of its rotation. By 1997, it
reached as high as about 60% of permissible value determined by the strength and
capacity of its drive. In 1997, CRC bearing assembly was inspected by drilling special
opening and using endoscope, and some amount of sodium was detected there
(Fig. 13). This phenomenon was interpreted as a result of sodium vapour transfer from
the reactor cover gas via the gap between the CRC and rotating plug (RP) and
subsequent accumulation of sodium and its compositions in the CRC bearing assembly.
      Works on partial withdrawal of the CRC from the reactor vessel were scheduled
in order to provide access to the bearing assembly for the sodium removal, and

142
                                                  Bearing assembly




          FIG. 13. Scheme of the BN-600 reactor vessel with rotating plugs.




appropriate preparations were made. This task was unique, since no procedures of
such a kind had ever been implemented on this type reactors in any country.
    During inter-maintenance interval, the program and the process of the CRC
withdrawal from the reactor vessel were developed, and all necessary devices were
designed and manufactured.
     CRC withdrawal (Fig. 14) confirmed that almost 100% of the bearing assembly
surface was covered with sodium deposits filling the gaps between the bearing balls
and cages. Besides, high density sodium deposits filled the gap between CRC and RP
in the areas of seizure.
     Both cages and balls were withdrawn, sodium residues were removed from the
bearing races and CRC / RP gaps, and new balls and cages were installed.
     Currently, obtained results and possible sources of this event are analysed.
     The main conclusion is that owing to the comprehensive work, CRC availability
has been restored and also experimental data of great importance for the fast reactors
development and operation have been obtained.


                                                                                   143
                                                               2630




                                                          0 2680




              FIG. 14. Relative location ofCRC and RP after CRC withdrawal.




      CONCLUSION

      In this paper, various anomalies and abnormal operation events occurred during
 BN-600 reactor operation which are the most important from the safety viewpoint, are
 reviewed. Successful overcoming of these events consequences and elimination of their
 sources, as well as reliable and stable operation of the BN-600 reactor during last years
 makes the ground for affirming large potential and prospects of this direction of the
 nuclear power.
      We hope that fast reactor operating experience gained in Russia will undoubtedly
 be of use for the specialists in other countries, where this direction is under
 consideration.




144
      UNUSUAL OCCURENCES IN FAST BREEDER TEST REACTOR

      R.P. KAPOOR, G. SRINIVASAN, T.R. ELLAPPAN, P.V. RAMALINGAM,
      A.T. VASUDEVAN, M.A.K. IYER, S.M. LEE, S.B. BHOJE
      Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research,
      Kalpakkam, India                                       """~~j(/^056256"

      Abstract
      Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) is a 40 MWt/13.2 MWe sodium cooled mixed
carbide fuelled reactor. Its main aim is to generate experience in the design, construction and
operation of fast reactors including sodium systems and to serve as an irradiation facility for
the development of fuel and structural materials for future fast reactors. It achieved first
criticality in Oct 85 with Mark I core (70% PuC - 30% UC). Steam generator was put in
service in Jan 93 and power was raised to 10.5 MWt in Dec 93. Turbine generator was
synchronised to the grid in Jul 97. The indigenously developed mixed carbide fuel has
achieved a burnup of 44,000 MW-d/t max at a linear heat rating of 320 W/cm max without
any fuel clad failure.
       The commissioning and operation of sodium systems and components have been
smooth and performance of major components, viz., sodium pumps, intermediate heat
exchangers and once through sodium heated steam generators (SG) have been excellent. There
have been three minor incidents of Na/NaK leaks during the past 14 years, which are
described in the paper. There have been no incident of a tube leak in SG. However, three
incidents of water leaks from water / steam headers have been detailed.
       The plant has encountered some unusual occurrences, which were critically analysed
and remedial measures, in terms of system and procedural modifications, incorporated to
prevent recurrence. This paper describes unusual occurrences of fuel handling incident of May
1987, main boiler feed pump seizure in Apr 1992, reactivity transients in Nov 1994 and Apr
1995, and malfunctioning of the core cover plate mechanism in Jul 1995. These incidents
have resulted in long plant shutdowns. During the course of investigation, various theoretical
and experimental studies were carried out for better understanding of the phenomena and
several inspection techniques and tools were developed resulting in enriching the technology
of sodium cooled reactors.
       FBTR has 36 neutronic and process parameters initiating reactor trip and has
encountered large number of trips since first criticality. The paper also highlights several
modifications affected in safety related systems for improved performance and safety reviews
to reduce the parameters initiating reactor trip.
       The lessons learnt from the analysis of these incidents and safety reviews have been
significant not only in improving FBTR performance but also as an important input for the
design of future fast reactors.

1.0   INTRODUCTION

      Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) is a 40 MWt/ 13.2 MWe sodium cooled, mixed
carbide fuelled, loop type reactor. It has two primary and secondary sodium loops and a
common steam water circuit, which supplies high pressure, high temperature superheated
steam to turbine generator (TG). Heat is rejected hi cooling tower (Fig 1). A 100% capacity
dump condenser is provided for reactor operation even when the TG is not in service. The
mam aim of the reactor is to generate experience in the design, construction and operation of
sodium cooled fast reactors and to serve as an irradiation facility for the development of fuels
and structural material for fast reactors. It achieved first criticality in Oct 85 with Mark I core

                                                                                              145
                                        SCHEMATIC FLOW DIAGRAM


                          INT. HEAT   SURGE    STEAM                 JT6AM
                          EXCHANGE*   TANK    GENEHATOI             TUKIIKE   OENEKAJOK




                                                                                    CIRCULATING
                                                                                      WATER
                                                                                      PUMP




                                                          Fig.1

(70 % PuC - 30% UC). The steam generator was put in service in Jan 93, power raised to 10.5
MWt in Dec 93 and 12 MWt in Jul 97 when TG was synchronised to the grid. The reactor is
presently in its 6th irradiation campaign. The reactor has operated for more than 20,000 h so
far with 6600 h operation at high power. Fig 2 gives the operation histogram since Jan 93 and
fig 3 gives the present core configuration.

2.0   PERFORMANCE OF THE FUEL

      Indigenously developed Pu rich mixed carbide fuel is chosen as driver fuel for Mark I
core(1). Since the fuel is new, it is proposed to ascertain its performance through Post
Irradiation Examination (PIE) and increase the reactor power in a phased manner. Detailed
PIE has been carried out in inerted shielded cells on one irradiated fuel subassembly (SA) at a
burnup of 25,000 MW-d/t at a peak linear heat rating (LHR) of 320 W/cm (Fig 4). PIE
included visual examination, dimensional measurement, leak testing, eddy current testing, X-
radiography and metallography. The observations were; shining appearance of the fuel pins,

                           HISTOGRAM OF REACTOR OPERATION




                   1993               1994 1995 19961997                                          1998
                                                             YEAR


                                                            Fig.2

146
                04/08 03/06 02/05 01/03            01/04 02/03/13
                                                            09         04/18




                            04/03 04/02 |CR/A|\04/24       04/23




                                                           28 SA CORE

                                        LEGEND


                                                 Zr - Nb EXPERIMENTAL SA ( 4 )



                             CORE CONFIGURATION

                                           Fig.3

maintenance of clad integrity, non-closure of fuel clad gap and fuel swelling rate being less
than predicted. From these observations, fuel performance has been inferred to be
excellent(2)(3). The fuel has since achieved a maximum burnup of 44,000 MW-d/t at LHR of
320 W/cm without any fuel clad failure. Clearance has also been obtained to enhance the LHR
and fuel burnup to 400 W/cm and 50,000 MW-d/t respectively. This is proposed to be
achieved shortly.

3.0   PERFORMANCE OF SODIUM SYSTEM

      Primary and Secondary sodium systems are in service for the past 14 years at a
maximum temperature of 485°C at the outlet of core and 420°C in sodium circuits and the
performance of the sodium circuit components has been satisfactory.(4)(5)(6) The sodium purity
has been well maintained and there has been no incident of any radioactive sodium leak from
the primary circuit. Once-through steam generator (SG) has been in service for about 6600 h
and there is no incident of steam generator tube leak.

                                                                                          147
                          SODIUM
                          OUTLET




                                                          TOP A X I A L
                                                          BLANKET PINS ( 7 N o . )




                                                         •FUEL PINS ( 61 No.)




                                                          BOTTOM AXIAL
                                                         "BLANKET PINS (7NO.)




                                                          HOLD DOWN
                                                          SPRING ( 12 No. )




                                                          SODIUM INLET



                              FUEL SUBASSEMBLY
                                           Fig.

      Three minor incidents of Na/NaK leak in the secondary sodium circuit and three minor
incidents of water leak from the water / steam subheaders of SG are described here.

3.1   Sodium/NaK leak incidents (Fig 5)

3.1.1 While preheating secondary cold trap during initial commissioning (Oct 84), about
2.5 1 of NaK leaked out from the NaK jacket through spark plug type high level probe.
Investigation revealed the failure of the level probe due to high pressure during preheating
because of nonavailability of adequate expansion space hi the jacket. The fire was put out
effectively hi 15 min by dry chemical powder (DCP). Modifications were done to prevent
recurrence by capping of level probes and providing an argon pot of 201 capacity to allow free

148
u                                                                     -»        r           ~1           i—
                                                                          1
                                                                                I          1
                                                                                           1 i           ' '
                                                 ___j                                      1               '
.j _ i _ i_ i_ j_ i                                                                        1                 '
                                                                                           1• »
                                                                                               i           i''
  ARGON CYLINDER                                                                           L               J
                                                                     1ACK FLOW1                    Nak
                                                                        TRAP               BUBBLER



                         SERVICE ARGON CIRCUIT


         ARGON
                                    -1
         SUPPLY"
                          [          6
                                      1——!                 Na OUTLET

                          t1         T-
                                      1
                                                                               Na INLET


                                                                      1
                         ENT                 EXPANSION                        ———I.
                                                POT
                                              (20lftres)
                                                                          SODIUM
                                        ,
                                                                                                   •Nak FILLED
                                                     ——          1
                                                           ^'l        COLDTRAP        F?            JACKET
                                                                           FOR
                                                                          SODIUM
                                                                     PURIFICATION




                    ARGON CIRCUIT OVER Nak SPACE

                       F*^^2%___________
             Na IN
                       i.'Si.-EVSVC.'




                                                 PROVISION FOR
                                                 He LEAK TESTING




           Na OUT-

       • EXISTING
       . MODinCATiON           FLOW THRO 1 SODIUM SAMPLER
               SODIUM/NaK LEAK INCIDENTS

                                            Fig.5

                                                                                                                 149
expansion of NaK during preheating phase. Surface thermocouples were also provided to
follow NaK temperature during pre-heating.

3.1.2 Secondary sodium sample is required to be taken twice a year for chemical analysis.
About one litre of sodium leaked out (Sept 87) through a swagelok coupling while putting in
service the secondary sodium flow through nickel sampler. The fire was fought using DCP
and COa extinguishers and was put off in 30 min. To prevent recurrence, provision was made
for helium leak testing of swagelok coupling joints after installation of the sampler. Over flow
type sampler with conoseal joints for better leaktightness and more representative sampling
was also installed in one of the secondary loops.

3.1.3 During adjustment of pressure setting of the regulating valve in supply argon system
(May 88) about 2 1 of NaK backed up and leaked out from the NaK bubblers provided for
supply argon purification. The NaK leak was carefully collected in a tray covered with DCP
and safely disposed off within 30 min. As a remedial measure, a backflow trap of 50 1
capacity was introduced on the upstream side of bubbler and a pressure equalising valve was
provided across it. ~

3.2   Water leak incidents in SG subheaders

      The SG is a counter current once through type and of modular construction in which
sodium flows on the shell side and water / steam flows hi the tubes (Fig 6). There are two
such modules in each of the secondary sodium loops and the 4 modules are housed in an
insulated SG casing.

3.2.1 In Jan 93 when SG was put in service for the first time, after 70 h of operation at 4
MWt, a water leak took place due to a linear pin hole defect in the end cap of one of the
orifice assemblies at SG inlet. All similar caps (35 numbers) were ultrasonically inspected and
four more were found having indication of linear defects. The leaking cap was replaced and
additional covers were welded on the defective caps and SG modules requalified (Fig 6). This
was attributed to inspection (having less capability to detect such defects) before accepting the
material for fabrication of these caps.

3.2.2 Water subheaders of the 4 modules of the SG are provided with flanged orifices located
inside the SG casing for flow measurement to study SG stability. In Aug 93, when reactor was
operating at 8 MWt, feed water was found leaking through the orifice flanges. Investigation
revealed that the leaktight orifice flanges under ambient conditions tend to develop leak under
operating conditions as a result of differential thermal expansion between the water
subheaders and the SG modules. All the orifice flanges were replaced with welded spools with
integral orifices.

3.2.3 hi Feb 98, when reactor was in shutdown state, while readjusting the settings of SG
safety valves, water leak was observed in one of the bosses in experimental thermowell in the
steam subheader of one of the SG modules. These thermowells are also provided for SG
stability studies. The leaking thermowell boss and plug were replaced with a dummy piece of
similar dimensions to have the same flow restriction in the path. Liquid penetrant inspection"
(LPI) was carried out on all similar welds in the four SG steam subheaders and no defective
indications were noticed. Investigations revealed that this was due to lack of heat treatment of
this part during fabrication.



150
                       15275
                                                                 OP" 1 9 3 - 7 . thk.. 8
                                                                         HELL




                               SODIUM OUTLET HEADER


                               WATER HEADER
WATER SUB HEADER ~ TflTlfl

                LOWER HEADER



                                                              SODIUM OUTLET HEADER




           LEAKY CAP
         REPLACEMENT




            ULEAKT
            KEY PLAN                                  MODIFIED END COVER
                                                      FOR DEFECTIVE CAPT




                      STEAM GENERATOR MODULE

                                          F i g .6

                                                                                           151
3.3 Major sodium circuit components replaced during 14 years of operation include; lower
parts of two control rod drive mechanism due to metallic bellows failure, central canal plug
due to failure of two thermocouples for measurement of outlet temperature of central fuel SA,
one cold trap in secondary sodium loop due to impurity loading during SG commissioning,
two reheaters of improved design in steam generator leak detection circuit and two secondary
sodium service bellows sealed valves due to bellows failure. Three sodium impurity monitors
viz.; electro-chemical hydrogen meters, electrochemical carbon meter and cover gas hydrogen
meters developed hi the centre have been added in the secondary sodium system.

4.0   UNUSUAL OCCURRENCES

      This section describes the four major unusual occurrences which had safety
implications and resulted hi very long plant shutdowns viz.; fuel handling incident, main
boiler feed pump seizure, reactivity transients and malfunctioning of core cover plate
mechanism.

4.1   Fuel Handling Incident(4)

      Fuel handling is carried out in shutdown state, with sodium at 180°C, with the help of
two charging/ discharging machines and two rotating plugs. Since a core SA has to be handled
6 m below 0 elevation, 6 m long, guide tube of 113 767 mm diameter is introduced into the
fuel handling canal to guide the fuel handling gripper and to prevent lifting of adjacent SA.

4.1.1 Incident Description

      During an inpile transfer operation hi May 1987 when a fuel SA was being transferred
to the periphery from the core, difficulties were experienced in releasing the SA hi its new
location. Manoeuvres were done to install the SA at various locations at the periphery, but to
no avail. Finally it was decided to discharge the SA, but the gripper mechanism was getting
stuck midway in the guide tube. The SA was forcibly extracted through the guide tube.
Examinations revealed bend in the head and foot and bow in the body of the SA but no fuel
pin failure. The fuel handling machine gripper was also found bent. When the guide tube was
being removed by normal procedure, it was not coming out. Attempts to remove the guide
tube along with its outersheath (which is fixed to the fuel handling canal of the reactor) also
proved futile. It was then obvious that the guide tube had got bent beyond the limit, which
will allow its removal through the canal. During the various manoeuvres to overcome the
problem, a complex mechanical interaction seemed to have taken place with the components
within the reactor vessel causing mechanical deformation to the fuel handling gripper, the fuel
S A and the guide tube.

      At this juncture, all further operation on pile was suspended. A quantitative measure of
the bend in the guide tube and extent of deformation to various other components in the
reactor vessel became necessary.

4.1.2 Investigations

      Three techniques were developed and utilised to assess the bend of the guide tube, viz.,
optical inspection, ultrasonic air gauging and mechanical disc gauging. Optical inspection was
carried out with a periscope/projector system (Fig 7). Sodium was drained to expose the
heads of S A and the bend of guide tube was measured by finding out the radius of sweep of its

152
                        EYE PIECE
                        1100




                                                             BENT GUIDE TUBE

                                                     "4100

                                                       FIELD OF VI£W*U
            PARTIALLY     "5150
        DRAINED No LEVE



                                                     OVER FLOW
                                                        PIPE
                                                                                 PURIFIED No
                                                                                 RETURN PIPE




                                                                                    IPHON
                                                                                BREAK PIPE



                                                                               REACTOR VESSEL



                                                          SECTIONAL PLAN
                                                             AT -4100




                   REACTOR          VESSEL INTERNALS INSPECTION
                                    THROUGH PERISCOPE


                                           Fig.7

bottom tip with reference to heads of SA when it is rotated on its own axis. This inspection
also indicated a lifted S A at the periphery where manoeuvres to lower the fuel SA were earlier
made. Slight deformations of the heads of some of the reflector subassemblies along two
spiral paths were also seen (Fig 8). Ultrasonic air gauging method involved lowering of an

                                                                                                153
SOURCE
CONTROL RODS                                                   Scale:-
                                                                         1cm **
BENT SUBASSEMBLIES


         OPTICAL INSPECTION                RESULTS OF CCMD INSPECTION

           DAMAGED SUBASSEMBLIES DURING FUEL HANDLING INCIDENT
                                 Fig.8
ultrasonic probe in a specially designed carrier, directing its beam towards the guide tube and
measuring the time of flight. The profiling was done under perfect leaktight conditions with
sodium partially drained to expose the complete length of the guide tube. Mechanical disc
gauging involved lowering of discs of different diameters inside the guide tube and measuring
the depth at which each disc stops entering further. Since the bend was much larger than the
inner diameter of the guide tube, gauging could be done only upto a certain depth and the
bend value had to be estimated by extrapolation. All these techniques were successful in
assessing the bend with a high degree of reliability and it became obvious that the guide tube
should be cut in-situ for its removal from the reactor. The profile also indicated that the
cutting had to be done at a depth of around 3 m below zero level.
      In the light of the sighting of a lifted SA during visual inspection, to authorise rotation
of plugs, it was important to rule out any lifted SA below the core cover plate housing
thermocouples for measuring the outlet temperatures of 85 SA. For this inspection, an under
sodium ultrasonic scanner was developed and it was confirmed that there was no protruding
SA below the core cover plate.

4.1.3 Retrieval of damaged components

       The design of leaktight remote cutting tool had the following special features; The
cutting to be done at a depth of 3 m, the tool to be accommodated within the guide tube bore
of 67 mm and provide a depth of cut of 23 mm without tool chatter, the bottom portion of the
cut guide tube to be held in position till the top part is removed, no cutting chips should fall
into the reactor and leak tightness should be maintained during the cutting operation. An
elegant remote cutting tool having these features was developed and it consisted of assembly
of telescopic tubes for transmitting the rotational movement to the tool and controlling and
monitoring the axial travel and depth of cut from the top. No lubricant was used and special
features were provided to recover all the chips generated. This tool also employed a leaktight
plug anchored to the bottom part of the guide tube to maintain leaktightness w.r.t. reactor
cover gas, to collect the chips generated and to hold the bottom part during complete process
of cutting and retrieval (Fig 9). The cutting sequence was carefully chosen to permit radial
entry of the tool holder along the guide tube thickness during the last stages of cutting, thus
avoiding tool chatter. After successful mockups, the tool was perfected and with
microprecision the in-situ cutting and retrieval of the damaged guide tube was successfully
completed in May 88. Measurement of the profile of the cut guide tube indicated a
deformation of 350 mm, bearing full testimony to the reliability of the various remote
methods employed to measure the bend.
       The retrieval of the damaged SA was another work successfully executed on the pile.
Since the core was relatively new, radioactivity levels were very low. Hence all the SA were
directly viewed and mapped through a transparent plate fixed on top of the fuel handling canal
and 18 numbers of steel and nickel reflectors SA were identified for replacement. The
retrieval operation was done using a two-finger gripper mechanism especially engineered for
this purpose. Subsequently core coordinate measuring device (Tube de visee), received from
France, was utilised to inspect 88 SA in the vicinity of the damaged path and 10 more
reflector SA having minor bends in their heads were also replaced (Fig 8).

4.1.4 Incident Analysis and Remedial Measures

     The sequence of events leading to the incident was reconstructed from all available
evidences. The incident was found to have originated in excessive friction in the fuel handling

                                                                                             155
                      Section - XX'


 WIRE ROPE




 OUTER HOUSING




             SCHEMATIC OF THE CUTTING TOOL
                          Fig.9

156
gripper assembly, either due to O-rings, or sodium aerosols or both, resulting in the inability
to open the fingers and release the SA. During the process of rotation of the plugs, the SA
seems to have slipped down slightly in the transfer flask resulting in damages to its own foot
and to the heads of reflector SA in its paths. During the manoeuvre to lower it in the
periphery, the bent foot ejected out an adjacent reflector SA. A complex mechanical
interaction took place between the ejected SA and the guide tube during subsequent rotation
of the rotating plugs, resulting in damage to the guide tube.

      Based on these findings, appropriate remedial measures, including mechanical stopper
for the fuel handling gripper and redundant interlocks for authorising plug rotation, were
implemented. Proper maintenance and operating procedures for the fuel handling mechanisms
were evolved. It took two years to recover from this incident and the reactor was restarted in
May 89. The remedial measures were so effective that about 300 fuel handling operations
carried out for the past 9 years involving charging, discharging and inpile transfer have been
smooth and trouble free.

4.2   Main boiler feed pump (MBFP) seizure(7)

      Steam water circuit (Fig 10) consists of condensate extraction pump (CEP) taking
suction from main condenser (MC) and dump condenser (DC) through low pressure flash tank
(LPFT), two contact type low pressure (LP) heaters, a deaerator working at 13 Kg/cm2
pressure to provide 190°C feed water and MBFP to supply water to SG at 125 Kg/cm2. MBFP
is a 10 stage barrel type pump designed for a feed water temperature of 196°C, delivering
89 m3/h flow at a head of 1770 mlc with operating speed of 5700 rpm and input horse power
of 580 kW. The required NPSH is 6.9 mlc (actual test value being 5 mlc). As per design, the
balancing leak off from the pump discharge is fed to the pump suction.

4.2.1 Incident description

      In Apr 92, this pump was being used at a flow of around 17 m3/h for preheating feed
water by its own power for putting SG in service. At 165°C feed water temperature, abnormal
noise was heard from the pump with large fluctuations (110 to 170 kg/cm2) in its discharge
pressure gauge. The motor current crossed full scale of 75 A and there was reduction in feed
water flow. The pump was immediately stopped and on inspection motor drive end thrust pads
and most of the stages of impellers, were found damaged. Water lubricated hydrostatic
bearing sleeve was found seized. Balancing piston and sleeve had scoring marks.

4.2.2 Investigation

       With the site location of deaerator from which the pump takes suction, the available
NPSH varies from 8.69 to 8.52 mlc, which under normal operating condition for full flow is
adequate. During investigation, it was found that prior to the incident condensate system had
to be shutdown to attend to some instrumentation problem. MBFP was kept hi recirculation
mode and system preheating was continued. Restoration of condensate system later on
resulted in admission of cold condensate to deaerator causing collapse in deaerator pressure
and hence reduction in available NPSH resulting in severe cavitation and flashing at the pump
inlet and causing damage.




                                                                                           157
4.2.3 Remedial Measures (Fig 10)

      Modifications to improve available NPSH at pump suction were carried out viz.;
balancing leak off line which was earlier heating the suction was routed to the deaerator,
continuous cold injection was ensured at pump suction to improve transient performance,
additional recirculation line was added to avoid pump operation at low flows. Operating
procedures were modified and feed water heating by package boiler steam was strictly adhered
to. This resulted in a delay of 8 months to put the SG in service.

      One of the two MBFBs has since been replaced with indigenous make. This pump
operates at 3600 rpm with same Q- H characteristics, without any hydrostatic bearing and
having lower NPSH requirements (4.3 mlc).

4.3   Reactivity Transients

4.3.1 Incident Description (Fig 11)

      In Nov 94, when the reactor was operating at 10.1 MWt, power was found to be slowly
increasing. Though the control rods were lowered one by one, the power continued to rise and
reached 10.4 MWt in about a minute. The control rods were cumulatively lowered by 7.6 mm
and the power was brought down to 10.1 MWt. The reactivity meter registered a spike of
3 pcm during the incident. Reactivity before and after the incident did not reveal any
measurable permanent reactivity gain.

     In Apr 95, during a startup, when the reactor was at 7.1 MWt, power increased sharply
by 450 kWt in 7 s. No control rod movement was made at this tune. Reactor underwent a
scram on high positive reactivity and the recorder indicated a spike of + 10 pcm. Criticality
measurements before and immediately after the incident revealed a reactivity gain of about
24 pcm. However, a reduction of this value to 14 pcm was observed upon subsequent
measurements. The measurement error itself is of the order of ± 10 pcm.

4.3.2 Investigations

      To identify the probable cause of the transients, 20 postulates were studied and 14 of
them were tested during reactor operation. Based on recorded observations, calculations, tests
and analysis, inadvertent raising of CR by operator just before the incident was ruled out. The
postulates studied can be broadly classified into the following five categories: viz. process
parameter changes, absorber movement, voids collapse and sodium filling, fuel movement
and moderator ingress(8).

4.3.2.1 Process parameter changes

      The changes in process parameters resulting in decrease in core inlet temperature
causing reactivity transient were studied. The required inlet temperature change to cause the
two transients were estimated to be -3.1 and -4.9°C respectively. Extensive tests on the
influence of changes in primary, secondary and feed water flow and steam pressure were
studied at 9.5 MWt power and the results are given in Table 1.

     All these experiments have shown that these events are reversible as well as recordable
by various chart recorders provided in the control room. As no change in any process

158
                                                                                DUMP
                                                                     VRrt   Ci CONTROL




                            'DRAIN TO LPfT

                       STEAM-WATER SYSTEM FLOW SHEET


  FROM DIP    DISCHARGE .




                                                      ——— -———MODIFICATION COMPLETED.

                                                      NON -RETURN CUM R6CIRCULAIION VALVE.




             —03-
SET OF ORIFICES




                  STEAM WATER SYSTEM MODIFICATION

                                             Fig.10

                                                                                             159
               VERNIER POWER(0ml031)                                                                 REACTIVITY ( 9 r o 0 3 0 )

              RAMCI           ' t IMW1


                                                                                                   CMAIIT trtte < M*mmh>
                                                                                            HII

                                                                                                                 HII
                                                                                                  III!




                                                                     ii::ii!
                                   JOTJr- 'o' Of TMt SOU.C          ifrl-'ii
                                                                       |''i,Ui




                                                                                                                          AT M.j^h QM ll.ii..rt.
                                                                    lEH
                                     »0-5MWt
                                     AT 2 3 - ? 2 h ON 13-11.1994

                                                                                   \'<                         'ii!
                                                                                   ill:
                                                                                                               111!
                                                                                                               1IU
                                                                                    I!T                  TTT

              REACTIVITY TRANSIENT OF 13.11.94
      VERNIER POWER(0ml031)                                                               REACTIVlTr (JroOJO)

      KAMCC_____: t t M W t

      CMAKT syEgQ: 100 mm/I
                                                                                    CKAHT 5l»teo         HO »in/>i




                                • SCRAM
                                 AT OV3t:lShON IO-Ot-1995




                                                                                                          "     ^~ » 10
                                                                                                                     10pcm
                                                                                                                        pcm. . SCRAM

                                                                                                                      AT O S - 3 6 ' I S h O N tO-Ot-1995J




                                                                        HgACTITITT (pern) ——•



              REACTIVITY TRANSIENT OF 10.04.95

                                                          Fig.11

160
parameter was observed during the course of transients, this being the cause for the incidents
was ruled out.


                            Table 1 Process Parameter Changes

            Event                                       Observations
  Primary sodium flow            4% increase results in power increase of 100 kWt
  change
  Secondary sodium flow          9.5% increase results in power increase by 350 kWt
  change
  Feed water flow change13.4% increase results in increase of power by 200 kWt
                        after a time delay of 200 s.
  Steam Pressure change Reduction of steam pressure from 114.7 to 97.4 Kg/cm2
  ________________results in increase of power by 500 kWt after a delay of 60 s,

4.3.2.2 Absorber movement

      Inadvertent movement of absorber away from core can result in reactivity increase.
Possibility of stuck contacts resulting in continuous raising of control rod, improper gripping
of control rod by control rod drive mechanism resulting in its relative movement and
movement of boron carbide pellets inside the control rod, were also studied and ruled out.
Also the remeasurement of control rod reactivity worth done in June 95 compared well with
the earlier values. Loss of antimony, a neutron absorber from auxiliary neutron source can
give a gain of 14 pcm. This requires breach of double containment to get into sodium and
should also affect the shutdown counts, which was not observed. Hence absorber movement
being the cause was ruled out.

4.3.2.3 Voids collapse and sodium filling

      Three scenarios were studied, viz., sodium voiding subassembly due to boiling and
sudden collapse of these voids, sudden release of accumulated argon gas from the core and
sudden release of accumulated helium from control rods. Filling of the void space by sodium
can result in reactivity gain. For such an incident 16% of the volume in a SA is required to
boil and this should have resulted in scram by the plugging detection subroutine. It was also
estimated that release of 41 cc of gas and its displacement by sodium, can explain the
transient. Tests were carried out to vary primary sodium free level in IHXs upto +100 mm for
argon entrainment but no perceptible reactivity change could be observed. Detailed analysis
revealed that sodium voiding by helium generation in control rods and their subsequent
displacement by sodium has to take place simultaneously in six control rods to cause the
transient which is highly improbable. Studies of all the three scenarios indicated that these
could not have caused the transients.

4.3.2.4 Fuel movement

      Any fuel restructuring leading to axial contraction could have positive gain in reactivity.
The fuel had seen a maximum / average burnup of about 13,000 710,000 MW-d/t at the time
of the transients in Apr 95. Central SA discharged in July 96 after a burnup of 25,000 MW-d/t
indicates no axial contraction. It is also observed that fuel swelling rates are less than
predicted which however is an irreversible phenomena and the reactivity changes will be

                                                                                              161
permanent. As the incident took place after loading 25th fuel SA, its worth was remeasured in
Aug 95 and it compares well with the earlier values. Geometric changes in the core due to
weight of core cover plate mechanism while it is resting on the top of the core for accurate
measurement of fuel SA outlet temperature and sudden reversal during normal operation
causing the transient, was also postulated. Experiment was done at low / high power and no
perceptible changes in reactivity could be observed. Hence fuel movement being the cause
was ruled out.

4.3.2.5 Moderator ingress

     Ingress of moderator hi the core causing such a transient was considered most likely.
Three scenarios were considered viz. oil ingress from mechanical seals of primary sodium
pumps, hydrogen/hydrate ingress through cold trap or through cover gas and ingress of Be
from the auxiliary neutron source. A special micro filter SA was loaded in the core and after
circulating 520 times the primary sodium inventory through this SA to trap sodium oil
reaction products, the filterate was analysed for carbon content and found to be very small (30
mg). It was considered inadequate to cause the transient (30 g). Any ingress of hydrate from
cover gas to cause the transient of this nature would have increased the plugging temperature
to 290°C. Plugging temperature was found to be well maintained at 105°C during both the
transients. An experiment was also carried out to observe the washing of hydrate from cold
trap by increasing the cold point temperature from 120 to 130°C for 12 h. No reactivity
changes could be observed. Efficacy of NaK bubbler for purifying argon and helium was also
checked and found OK. Visual inspection of reactor vessel surfaces and bottom of rotating
plugs did not indicate any buildup of hydrate deposits on the surfaces which could get
loosened and fall in the core. Ingress of Be was ruled out as there was no change in the
shutdown count. Hence moderator ingress may not be the cause for the transients.

4.3.2.6 The influence of any parameter causing reactivity changes being more perceptible at
low power, the reactor was kept in subcritical state at 180 and 400°C for about two weeks for
observation but no reactivity transient was observed.

4.3.2.7 Present Status

      Results of detailed investigations carried out did not reveal the cause of these two
transients. Due to hydrodynamic coupling of the two primary sodium loops, investigations
regarding possibility of introduction of cold slug of Na into the core are planned. Since the
transients have occurred during high power operation and reactivity inputs were very small
causing no undue safety concern, permission was sought to continue reactor operation with
enhanced scram threshold for reactivity ( ± 30 pcm) and augmented data acquisition system
to acquire sufficient data for analysis in case the incident recurs. Investigations carried out in
various spells during 1994 to 96 cumulatively lasted for about 12 months.

     Since the incident in Apr 95, reactor has operated for about 6800 h with 4600 h at high
power and the transient has not recurred.

4.4   Malfunction of Core Cover Plate Mechanism(CCPM)

      The outlet temperature monitoring of 84 core SA is done by means of thermocouples
housed in Core Cover Plate Mechanism (CCPM). The fuel SA thermocouples are scanned by
central data processing system (CDPS) to generate trip signals. The CCPM (Fig 12) is a 6 m


162
                                                      CENTRAL CAHAl PLUG


     NON-REVERSE COUPLING
     tUNtlATERAL DEVICE)                              UPPER COMMAND TUBE

    MANUAL DRIVE WI1H
    BALL L SCREW ASS'y




    TOP NEOPRENC                                      BEADING HOUSING
    BEUOW1
    V RING
    SEALING    .,,„„
                                                               IMICRSEAL ARGON
                                                                   SUPPLY




                                                               CONTROL PLUG


SUSPECTED                                                   eorroH METALLIC
LOCATION                                                      BELLOWS

OF SEIZURE
                                                            CONTROL PLUG SKIRT




                                                           CORE T C ' j IN THEHMOWELLS
                                                                   C»HM.»)


                                                           STELLtTE BUSHING
                                                              HOUSING


                                                            S1ELLITC BUSHING




                                                           FIXED CORE COVER PLATE

                                                            MOBILE CORE COVER PLATE



                         SCHEMATIC OF CCPM ASSEMBLY




                           FtXCO CC PLAtC




         aonon POSITION            WORKING POSITION       TOP POSIIIQN
              ( Omm )                   (iSmm )             17$ mm)




        THREE POSITIONS OF THE MOBILE COPE               COVER PLATE




CORE COVER PLATE MECHANISM

                                  Fig.12

                                                                                         163
long, 82.5 mm dia component centrally located in the control plug and consists of a fixed and
a mobile core cover plate which is translated manually by means of a command tube & ball
 screw assembly. The command tube houses a central canal plug having 3 thermocouples for
measuring the outlet temperature of central fuel SA. The fixed plate houses the thermocouples
wells (having 2 thermocouples each) and mobile plate houses the sleeves for directing the jets
of sodium from the outlet of SA to the thermocouples. The mobile plate has three positions
viz., fuel handling position (75 mm above SA heads), normal working position (15 mm above
SA heads) and bottom position (resting over the SA heads). The leaktightness in CCPM is
achieved by means of a primary barrier (SS bellows) at the bottom and secondary barrier ("O"
rings and neoprene bellows) at the top. The interseal space between primary and secondary
barriers is supplied with fresh argon at a higher pressure to prevent release of radioactive gas
to RGB in case of a breach in the barriers.

4.4.1 Incident description

      During normalisation of pile after fuel handling operations in Jul 95, CCPM could not
be lowered to normal working position from fuel handling position. Various operations
resulted in its getting stuck at 81 mm position above the top of SA heads. The likely causes
were attributed to mechanical obstruction at the top, below the core cover plate or within the
mechanism. Based on systematic investigations viz., checking for obstruction by dismantling
the ball screw mechanism, scanning the space below the core cover plate and above the top of
SA heads by ultrasonic under sodium scanner, ensuring leaktightness of bottom metallic
bellows and checking for free movement of CCPM at the stellite guide bushes fixed to the
control plug, it was confirmed that the sticking is in the interseal space having an annular gap
of 1 mm between the command tube and the outer sheath. Based on safe load analysis, a
jacking down force of 780 kg was applied to release the sticking and make the CCPM
functional. Precise cause for malfunctioning could not be identified(8).

      During normalising of pile after next fuel handling operation in Jul 96, CCPM again
could not be lowered from 80 mm position to its normal working position.

4.4.2 Investigation

       After carrying out similar checks as in 1995 and confirming the sticking in interseal seal
space, a safe jacking down force upto 1000 kg was applied with sodium temperature upto
400°C but CCPM could not be moved down. Following investigations were carried out to
identify the location and the nature of seizure more precisely;
   • Introduction of 0.35/0.8 mm dia, 1.5 m long hypodermic needles in the annular gap
       between command tube and outer sheath. It could be introduced freely upto the step in
       the outer sheath.
   • High pressure argon injection into the interseal space through these hypodermic needles
       to dislodge any foreign matter.
   • Introduction of circular SS shim cutter (0.1 mm thick, 1.6 m long) into the annular gap.
       It went down freely upto the step in the outer sheath.

      No smear of sodium oxide or any other foreign matter could be found by these three
techniques. Load deflection measurement in the horizontal direction indicated the possible
area of seizure to be below the step in the outer sheath and above the SS bellows (Fig 12) and
the most likely reason could be mechanical interference. Further investigations are pursued.
Cumulatively, about 8 months were spent for various investigations.

164
4.4.3 Implications and present status

      Experiments were carried out on power to measure the fuel SA outlet temperature with
CCPM stuck at 80 mm position and a temperature attenuation of 7% average was found in
Mark I SA. However this attenuation is large for SA having lesser flows than the Mark I fuel.
Proper monitoring of likely entry of cold slugs of Na causing reactivity transients is also
affected with CCPM at 80 mm position. 3 D analysis of outlet plenum thermal hydraulic,
although being a complex subject, was carried out to establish the level of plugging that can
be detected viz. a viz. allowable plugging for fuel clad integrity. PSA studies based on
available data for plugging of any SA during operation has also been carried out. Based on
these studies, clearance was obtained for reactor operation with suitable lowering of scram
thresholds generated by CDPS on fuel SA outlet thermocouples.

     CCPM remains stuck at 80 mm position. This component is neither easily amenable for
dismantling nor inspection below the step in the outer sheath. To improve flow and
temperature measurement capability in the core, the following is planned:
   • Development of an eddy current flowmeter which can be lowered through the fuel
     handling canal during shutdown to measure flow at the outlet of a SA as a periodic
     surveillance.
   • Fabrication of a longer central canal plug for positioning it at 15 mm normal working
     position to accurately measure the outlet temperature of central fuel SA.

4.5   System modifications to improve plant availability

      It is observed that in about 20,000 h of plant operation, there have been 270 trips (142
LOR / 128 scrams) which is rather large. These trips have originated mainly from neutronic
instrumentation, sodium pump drive systems, uninterrupted power supply (UPS) system and
steam water system. It was also noted that the plant is having 36 parameters initiating reactor
trip which are also very large when compared with other fast reactors. Hence it was decided to
adopt two pronged approach to improve plant availability viz.; to improve system engineering
to avoid trips due to component failure / malfunction in critical systems and to carry out
systematic incident analysis for eliminating unnecessary trip parameters without
compromising safety.

4.5.1 Improvements in the following critical systems have been carried out;
    • Replacement of neutronic and delayed neutron detector (DND) channels by state of art
      system. The salient features include pluggable modules facilitating on line maintenance,
      easy on-line testing and calibration features, microprocessor based reactivity
      computation and better noise immunity by use of super screened cables and opto
      isolators.
    • Replacement of UPS with state of art system. The salient features include higher rating,
      regulated backup source, synchronous transfer from inverter to backup source and vice
      versa and inverter system following the grid frequency.
    • Ward Leonard speed control system for sodium pumps was improved by eliminating
      pump drive trip parameters, improve speed control accuracy to ± 1 rpm and working
      environment by providing air conditioned enclosures for the control panels.
    • Steam water system needed several modifications for improved performance viz., better
      design of steam bypass control valve to work in two phase flow and improvements hi


                                                                                            165
    hydraulic system for control valves. Modification related to replacement of contact to
    surface type feed heaters is planned.
  • Commissioning of prestartup channels of high sensitivity to enable reactor restart after a
    prolonged shutdown.
  • Strain gauge system for friction force measurement of control rods and provision of
    control rod exercising on power to always ensure its availability for safety function.
  • Duplication of central data processing system with one operating and the other on auto
    standby.

4.5.2 Based on detailed study and incident analysis, the following safety parameters were
either modified or found redundant and removed.
    • 3s interlock on control rod raising was removed to reduce startup duty demand on
       CRDM motors.
    • Inhibition provided for reactivity trip during startup and power raising.
    • Trip on negative reactivity incorporated after the reactivity transients.
    • LOR on low current in CRDM electromagnetic coils removed.
    • Threshold for control rod level discordance increased.
    • Log P scram threshold being lowered to 10% of nominal power to ensure takeover by
       Lin P during power raising.
    • Class II LOR (resulting in power setback) on thermal parameters in the core removed.
    • Inhibition on plugging detection subroutine (PDSR) raised to 2 MWt.

5.0     CONCLUSION
  • Pu-U monocarbide fuel performance has been excellent.
  • Operation of sodium system and components has been very good.
  • Remedial measures implemented after detailed analysis of the incidents of NaK/Na
    leaks in secondary circuit, water leaks in SG steam/water subheaders, fuel handling
    incident and MBFP seizure have been very effective.
  • Inspite of detailed investigation of reactivity transients and malfunctioning of CCPM
    incidents, the cause could not be identified. Further efforts are in progress.
  • To improve plant availability and reduce shutdowns, a large number of improvements in
    critical systems and safety logic have been carried out.

                                ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
     Authors acknowledge the investigative work carried out by various Task Forces to
systematically analyse the unusual occurrences in the plant. Field work carried out by the
personnel of Reactor Operation and Maintenance Group is also gratefully acknowledged.

                                      REFERENCES
      1) Ganguly.C. et al - Development and fabrication of 70% PuC 30% UC fuel for Fast
         Breeder Test Reactor in India, Nuclear Technology, Vol 72, Jan 86.
  2) Govindarajan.S. et al - Performance of FBTR mixed carbide fuel, IAEA - TEC DOC -
     1039 on Influence of high dose irradiation on core structural and fuel materials in
     advanced reactors, 16-19 June 97, Obninsk, Russian Federation.

166
3) Baldev Raj et al - Post irradiation examination of mixed (Pu, U) C fuel irradiated in the
   fast breeder reactor, IAEA - TEC DOC - 1039 on Influence of high dose irradiation on
   core structural and fuel materials in advanced reactors, 16-19 June 97, Obninsk, Russian
   Federation.

4) Bhoje.S.B. et al - Commissioning of Fast Breeder Test Reactor, International
   Conference on fast reactors and related fuel cycles, Oct 28 - Nov 1, 1991, Kyoto, Japan.

5) Kapoor.R.P. et al - Safety related Operating Experience with Fast Breeder Test Reactor,
   International Topical meeting on sodium cooled fast reactor safety, 3-7* Oct 1994,
   Obninsk, Russian Federation.

6) Kapoor.R.P. et al - Operating Experience of Fast Breeder Test Reactor and its utilization
   as an Experimental Facility, 5th Asian symposium on Research Reactors, May 29-31,
   1996, Taejon, Korea.

7) Kale.R.D. et al - Analysis of failure of Axial Thrust Balancing and Thrust bearing of a
   small capacity boiler feed pump for a nuclear power plant, IV Asian International
   Conference on Fluid Machinery, Oct 1993, China.

8) Bhoje.S.B. et al - Status of Fast Reactor Development in India, Proceedings of the 29th
   annual meeting of the International Working Group on Fast Reactors, May 14 - 17,
   1996,Aktau.




                                                                                        167
       UNUSUAL OCCURENCES DURING THE WHOLE OPERATION
       OF BN-350 NPP

       S. ANDROPENKOV
       -kf   ui i Atomic
       Mangyshlak A.L • T-Energy /-•  i
                                  Complex,
       Kazakhstan



       Abstract
       Unusual occurrences during the whole operation BN-350 NPP.

         1 .Oil ingress in high pressure receiver for the not reveled reason, 12.05. 1994.
        2.1ncrease of water radioactivity of circulating water supply system due to heat
exchanger leak of spent fuel assembly washing out system, 17.09.1993.
        3.Lack of passableness of sodium drain header of primary circuit reveled during
inspection on scheduled preventative maintenance, 28.11.1996.
        4.Destruction of the blow-offline of MCP-6 due to corrosion damage of the pipeline
while unit was being operated at rated power, 23.04.1993.
        5.Lack of passableness of blow-down pipeline connecting reactor gas cover with gas-
type pressurizer while unit was being operated at rated power, 17.11.1994.
        6.Sodium ingress in blow-down pipeline of loop-5 intermediate heat exchanger while
loop-5 was being fed of sodium during scheduled preventative maintenance, 27.06,1994.
        7.Resistance deterioration of electroheating zones of loop-4 due to heat exchanger leak
and water ingress in air-pipeline of primary circuit boxes recirculating air system, 02.05.1997.
        S.Resistance deterioration of electroheating zones of sodium drain header of secondary
circuit was sopped in the water for the extinguishing the fire of blowing ventilation oil-
strainer, 23.12.1994.
        9.Sodium ingress in gas-type pressurizer through pipeline of primary sodium cleanup
system and blow-down pipeline of failed MCP-2 while primary sodium cleanup system was
being connected to the primary circuit, 17.08.1976.

        As a rule, the main reactor systems are scrutinized more carefully than the auxiliary
reactor systems and the order actions are existed for eliminating and mitigating of
consequences of main reactor system fails. Therefore the auxiliary reactor system fails may
impact on the main reactor systems through places of its contact in significant measure. The
influence of auxiliary reactor system fails on main reactor systems and its possible
consequences for behavior of the main reactor systems have been analyzed on the basis of the
above-mentioned occurrences. Significance of the above-mentioned occurrences for nuclear
safety BN-350 NPP have been analyzed too.


                                     INTRODUCTION

        The occurrences selected for this paper have took place only one time during the
whole operation BN-350 NPP and are features for Liquid Metal- cooled Fast Breeder Reactor.
At that time, when these occurrences took place, the order actions for these occurrences were
not existed and identifying appropriate actions directed to eliminating and mitigating of
consequences of these occurrences was enough difficult.

                                                                                           169
                               UNUSUAL OCCURRENCES

        The first group of occurrences includes three occurrences, which were caused
deficiencies of design.
         The first occurrence of them is «Lack of passableness of sodium drain header of
primary circuit reveled during inspection on scheduled preventative maintenance)) (FIG.l).
The steel disk was welded to primary circuit sodium drain header of loops-4, 5, 6 for sealing
of penetration of primary circuit sodium drain header of loops-4, 5, 6 between equipment
primary circuit box of loop-6 and primary circuit sodium storage system box. Freezing of
primary circuit sodium and plugging of primary circuit sodium drain header of loops-4, 5, 6
throat in that place due to heat transfer augmentation connected with setting of that steel disk
was reveled during inspection on scheduled preventative maintenance. Normal operational
system for temperature control of primary circuit sodium drain header of loops-4, 5, 6 is
thermocouples. Really controlled temperature on these thermocouples was within the limits of
order threshold of electroheating (approximately 250°C). That freezing of primary circuit
sodium and plugging of primary circuit sodium drain header of loops-4, 5, 6 throat was
reveled on lack of passableness of sodium drain header of primary circuit while loop-4 was
being fed of sodium during inspection. The primary circuit drain system is the part of the
emergency core cooling and residual heat removal system. The emergency core cooling and
residual heat removal system is put into operation in non-automatic mode and it is constantly
in standby mode. Auxiliary electroheating zone and auxiliary thermocouple were assembled
in that place for eliminating of recurrence of this occurrence. Transference of primary circuit
sodium from sodium storage tank of primary circuit to free (empty) volume of sodium drain
header of primary circuit one time per week was included in test program for verify of
passableness of sodium drain header of primary circuit with direct method.

        The second occurrence in that group is «Destruction of the blow-off line of MCP-6
due to corrosion damage of the pipeline while unit was being operated at rated power»
(FIG.6). Because of local overheating of pipeline section of blow-off of MCP-6 there was
accelerated corrosion damage of the pipeline. The blow-offline of MCP-6 was unsealed. This
unsealing was detected only on decrease of pressure in the MCP-6 gas cover, because of the
outflow of protective gas from MCP-6 gas cover was insignificant and the growth of sodium
levels in MCP-6 tank and leakage drain tank-6 was not watched. The increase of aerosol
activity was within the limits of norm. After separating MCP-6 gas cover from reactor gas
cover, it was organized feeding of protective gas for equalization pressure between MCP-6
gas cover and reactor gas cover. Really controlled temperature on thermocouples, which
control this section of blow-off line, was within the limits of order threshold of electroheating.
The defect was eliminated after ending of reactor microcampaign.

        The third occurrence in that group is «Lack of passableness of blow-down pipeline
connecting reactor gas cover with gas-type pressurizer while unit was being operated at rated
power» (FIG.3). Inner diameter of blow-down pipeline connecting reactor gas cover with gas-
type pressurizer is 195 mm. That blow-down pipeline is the part of the emergency core
cooling and residual heat removal system. Normal operational system for temperature control
of this pipeline is thermocouples. Really controlled temperature on these thermocouples was
within the limits of threshold (approximately 170 degrees C). The blower of gas cladding
failure detection system transfers analyzed gas from the reactor gas cover into the MCP-1 gas
cover through analyzing chambers of this system. Scheme of gas cladding failure detection
system consents to transfer analyzed gas from the reactor gas cover into the MCP-1 or 6 gas


170
                                                                                                                                            into ventilation
                                                                                                               402/4      I— -
                                                                                                   i—I-LJr -N--L
                                                                                                               to primary circuit storage system

  1204   1203 26                                                         11                                   GTP -3.8               11                                                 26   1203 1204

into ventilation
                                                                      -HXV                                                       -Kh                                                    to vacuum system
                                                                                                                                                                         ._4Xj_
                13           12                                                                                                                                                   12   X13

                                                             935                                                                       935
                                                                                                                                                                        15
                                      15
                                                       JZL                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                     r>I / MCP                                                                                                                                ,        4"
                                                                                                                            I———
                                                                                                                                       MCP                    o
                               «                                                                                                                                                              +18.1
                                                                                                                                                     \


            •        IHE    -N™ SLT     — >-~-_                                                                             _ • --'          M
                                                                                                                                                    —————-
                                                                                                                                                 "*•"•
                                                                                                                                                             .. rw •»   —
                                                                                                                                                                            -IXI-      IHE    -



                                                                                                                                                              J
                                                  —^1 I IW
                                                             — — .^— _                                                                WIK


                                                                                                                                                              SLT
                     4-
                   6 >      .^
                             ^                                      loops N 1.2.3                                 loops Nt 4.5.6
                                                                                                                           AC C                                              > t


                                                               30


                     - level meter                                                                 \\A 4<>6                ^s        „.
                                                                                                   1/\|                   l\ /]
                                                                              88           405/1
                                                                                     411
                     - flowmeter                                                   1— JVU-J~N- ERff^ — I-                 -- T^ M                   »
                                                                                   MXh                             -3-8          ! ^403/1-6
                     - pressure gage                                                       405/2                                 1
                                                                                                                                  — 1XJ ——*"                 to primary circuit sodium
                     - main pipeline                                                                EMP-2
                     - drain pipeline                                                                                            ,—[M ——•-                   storage system tanks
                                                                                                                                 l    K^j404/1-6
                     - gas blowdown pipeline                                                        K/1407



                                                         FIG. 1. Emergency cooling core and residual heat removal system.
                                            -M-                                    circulating
                                                                                   water supply
                                                                                   system

      primary
      circuit box
                                            (xi—e-                                 circulating
                                                                                   water supply
                                                                                   system



                                            -air
                                           -blower

                                 —C^5— -flowmeter



                    FIG. 2 Primary circuit boxes recircnlating air system.


cover only. Due to lack of passableness of the blow-down pipeline the pressure of reactor gas
cover was down. Decrease of the reactor gas cover pressure was detected on decrease of
pressure in low-pressure chamber of reactor pressure header. The direct control of reactor gas
cover pressure is absented, because the sample pipeline from the reactor gas cover was
plugged with sodium evaporation before, because of this sample pipeline has not sodium
evaporation strainer (sodium vapor trap). After changing the electroheating threshold of
electroheating zones of the blow-down pipeline connecting reactor gas cover with gas-type
pressurizer from 170 degrees C to 300 degrees C the passableness of blow-down pipeline is
restored. At present, the electroheating threshold of electroheating zones of the blow-down
pipeline connecting reactor gas cover with gas-type pressurizer is 300 degrees C.

        The second group of occurrences includes two occurrences, which were caused
deficiencies of procedure.
        «Sodium ingress in blow-down pipeline of loop-5 intermediate heat exchanger while
loop-5 was being fed of sodium during scheduled preventative maintenance)) (FIG.l) is the
first occurrence in that group. Control of sodium levels of loop-5, while it was being fed of
sodium, is existed with sodium level meters of MCP-5 tank and leak sodium tank-5
(intermediate heat exchanger has not its own sodium level meter). Due to worse passableness
of blow-down pipelines of MCP-5 tank and leakage drain tank-5 than passableness of blow-
down pipeline of intermediate heat exchanger-5, it chanced sodium ingress in blow-down
pipeline of loop-5 intermediate heat exchanger. After cutting the pipeline of intermediate heat
exchanger-5 and its gas blowing-down, the passableness was restored. After this occurrence
procedure of feeding of primary circuit loops of sodium was changed.

        The second occurrence in this group is «Sodium ingress in gas-type pressurizer
through pipeline of primary sodium cleanup system and blow-down pipeline of failed MCP-2
while primary sodium cleanup system was being connected to the primary circuit)) (FIG.4).
The primary sodium cleanup system, connected with pipelines with pipelines of loops-2 and
3, is general for all sodium coolant of primary circuit. Loop-2 was on maintenance and
separated from primary circuit with isolation gate valves N 1,2. When personal began to put
into operational primary sodium cleanup system, it was fed from pressure pipeline of MCP-3

172
                                                      1240                   1244


                   ®,   pressure gage
                                                                            1245
                        gas blowdown pipeline

                                                                                          —'
                                                                                           ^,
                                                                                                              1206   1205
                                                                                         r "\
                                                        •)
                                                                                                              -tXHX-
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                     loop-6
  1204    1203                                                                                  11                                 1203   1204
                                                        "\                                 "\M
                                                                                           ^I/N                                           XH
into ventilation                                                                                                            to vacuum system
                                                                                           3— '                       12    X 13
              13

                                                                                            935' *
                                                        ^                    \( -i                   n          15

                                                                                                                              14
                                                                                /                MCJ
                                                                             /\ s                             SLT

                                                                              A 1)2  n
                                                                                \, it ito ventil?
                                                             4 Q2/' 1           / si 1
                                                              N/1
                                                              /\
                                                                        t n n rirnf IIV ri rciiit stor

                                                             GTP


                                 FIG. 3 Gas cladding failure detection system.
                                                                                           K     into ventilation
                                                                                           IXH1—-
                                                                                      to primary circuit storage system

1204   1203 26                                                                                                            26   1203 1204




            - flowmeter
            - pressure gage                         Primar)'sodium
            - main pipeline                         cleanup system
            - gas blowdown pipeline

                                      FIG. 4 Scheme of sodium ingress in gas-type pressurizer.
 sodium pipeline
                      to loops                            4B          5B                    to loops
 argon                 N 7,8,9                      r——IXh-                                  N 10,11,12
- BMP
                                                    [429/1                 429/1         343/2;
 pressure gage
 thermocouple
                                                draining and
 level meter                                    feeding of loops
                                                N 7.8,9      N 10,11,12
                                                of secondary circuit                                      o




                                        422/1




                   FIG. 5 Drain system and Storage system of secondary sodium circuit.
-J
o\
                                                                                                                      into ventilation

                                                                                               £         to piimary circuit storage system

       1204    1203 26                                                                                                                       26   1203 1204
     HXl-i-h-
     into ventilation


                                                      93B


                                                     n
                     H                              MCP
                         -r"i               I
                                         SLT /^
                 '        IHE   ixi-         -- • ' —>.     ._.




                                           (
                                - level meter
                                - pressure gage
                                - main pipeline
                                - drain pipeline
                                - gas blowdown pipeline




                                                          F/G. (5 Scheme of blow-down pipelines of primary circuit.
                                                        from chamber of
                                    to special          spent foel assembly
                                    canalization        washing out system



                                                              circulating
                                                              water supply
                                                              system

                             r>     o-     r>


                                                           -level meter
                                                            -pump


                              FIG. 7 Closed cooling wafer system.


and, by mistake, discharge pipeline of primary sodium cleanup system was connected with
pipeline of failed loop-2. Immediately after supplying of sodium flow rate, sodium level in
MCP-2 tank began to grow. After filling MCP-2 tank, it chanced sodium ingress in gas-type
pressurizer through blow-down pipeline of MCP-2 and blow-down pipeline connecting
reactor gas cover with gas-type pressurizer. Sodium level in reactor vessel began to fall and
the pressure in primary circuit gas cover began to grow, because of electroheating of gas-type
pressurizer was failed. Reactor was emergency shut down. After reactor emergency shutdown,
sodium ingress in gas-type pressurizer was ceased. After as this occurrence was happened,
procedure of connection of primary sodium cleanup system to the primary circuit was
changed. At present, according to procedure, the primary sodium cleanup system is connected
only to pipelines of one loop.

        The third group of occurrences includes three occurrences, which were caused
auxiliary reactor system fails.
        The first occurrence in this group is «Resistance deterioration of electroheating zones
of loop-4 due to heat exchanger leak and water ingress in air-pipeline of primary circuit boxes
recirculating air system» (FIG.2). Resistance deterioration of electroheating zones of primary
circuit loops is one from safety emergency alarms for sodium leak detection of primary
sodium pipelines and equipment. After passing this alarm, it was found out, that auxiliary
electroheating zones have resistance deterioration too. One from safety emergency alarms for
sodium leak detection of primary sodium pipelines and equipment is the increasing of aerosol
radioactivity in equipment primary circuit boxes. But there is no increasing of aerosol
radioactivity in equipment primary circuit box of loop-4. Electroheating zones of loop-4 with
resistance deterioration were turned off with keys of control. During watching air-pipelines
and equipment of primary circuit boxes recirculating air system, it was found out, that due to
heat exchanger leak of this system it chanced water ingress in air-pipeline of primary circuit
boxes recirculating air system of loop-4. After the change-over on auxiliary air-pipeline of
primary circuit boxes recirculating air system and separation of failed heat exchanger with
isolation gate valves, the resistance of electroheating zones of loop-4 was restored.


                                                                                           177
        The second occurrence in this group is «Increase of water radioactivity of circulating
water supply system due to heat exchanger leak of spent fuel assembly washing out system»
(FIG.7). Unit was under planned preventative maintenance. There was an ejection of
radioactive water in normal unradioactive circuit of circulating water supply system due to
heat exchanger leakage of spent fuel assembly washing out system during this system
operation. This ejection of radioactivity water was found out with leak detection system on
increasing of radioactivity of normal unradioactive water. The closed cooling water system
was assembled for eliminating of recurrence this event. In addition to control of radioactivity
of normal unradioactive water during operational that closed cooling water system, water
levels in closed cooling water system tanks are being controlled too.

         The third occurrence in this group is «Resistance deterioration of electroheating zones
of sodium drain header of secondary circuit was sopped in the water for the extinguishing the
fire of blowing ventilation oil-strainer» (FIG.5). Unit was being operated at rated power.
There was an ignition of the blowing ventilation oil-strainer due to short-circuit in electric
power supply lines. By forces of shift personnel and fire-fighting brigade the fire was located
and extinguished. But during the extinguishing the fire of blowing ventilation oil-strainer, the
sodium drain header of secondary circuit was sopped in the water. Electroheating zones of the
sodium drain header of secondary circuit with resistance deterioration were turned off with
keys of control because of danger of short-circuit between electroheating zones, that electric
power supplied from different phase of the same transformer. The pump sodium circulation
was organized for drying electroheating zones of sodium drain header of secondary circuit.
The heated secondary circuit sodium transference was organized from the sodium storage
system tanks of secondary circuit into working loops of secondary circuit and return. After
drying and restoring of resistance of electroheating zones of sodium drain header of secondary
circuit, the pump sodium circulation was ceased. Electroheating zones of sodium drain header
of secondary circuit was turned on according to order thresholds of electroheating.

        The last occurrence in this paper is «Oil ingress in high pressure receiver for the not
reveled reason». Protective gas (argon) is retained in three high pressure receivers for
technology needs, such as gas feeding the reactor gas cover, equipment gas covers of primary
and secondary circuit, tank gas covers of primary and secondary circuit sodium storage
system and etc. According to test program, the protective gas in these high pressure receivers
are analyzed one time per week. The protective gas is fed by high pressure compressor from
argon gas bottles into high pressure receiver. Before the gas feeding, pure argon sample from
these argon gas bottles is selected for the analysis. If this analysis is within the limits of norm,
the protective gas is being fed into the high pressure receiver. During selection of pure argon
sample for the analysis from high pressure receiver the presence of oil was revealed. The
reason of oil ingress was not identified. This occurrence itself has no real or potential nuclear
safety or radiological safety relevance, but if oil ingress in high pressure receiver was not
revealed promptly, this occurrence maybe significant in its consequences. Possibly, such
occurrence or the similar occurrences will be able to explain such occurrences as abnormal
behavior reactivity and other events that took place in the reactors due to not optimal design,
technology and operational practice.




178
                                       CONCLUSION

        For systems with pipelines filled of sodium, which are in standby mode and are
emergency safety systems or part of these systems, very important, that direct method for
control availability of these systems is existed. This demand is connected with enough higher
temperature of sodium melting.
       The main reactor system fails are caused with influence of auxiliary reactor system
fails are able to be enough difficult for identifying initial origin and appropriate actions
directed to eliminating and mitigating of consequences of these occurrences.
        At present, mistakes of personal are caused deficiencies of procedure for auxiliary
reactor systems, especially if these mistakes are not identified promptly, maybe significant at
that time, when the reactor main system fail will be took place.




                                                                                           179
       IMPACT OF LMFBR OPERATING EXPERIENCE ON PFBR DESIGN

       S.B. BHOJE, S.C. CHETAL, P. CHELLAPANDI, S. GOVINDARAJAN, S.M. LEE,
       A.S.L. KAMESWARA RAO, R. PRABHAKAR, S. RAGHUPATHY, B.S. SODHI,
       T.R. SUNDARAMOORTHY, G. VAIDYANATHAN
       Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research,
       Kalpakkam, India                                     """"""xAo"o56258



       Abstract

         PFBR is a 500 MWe, sodium cooled, pool type, fast breeder reactor currently under
detailed design. It is essential to reduce the capital cost of PFBR in order to make it
competitive with thermal reactors. Operating experience of LMFBRs provides a vital input
towards simplification of the design, improving its reliability, enhancing safety and achieving
overall cost reduction. This -paper includes a summary of LMFBR operating experience and
details the design features of PFBR as influenced by operating experience of LMFBRs.


1. INTRODUCTION
       India has limited uranium and abundant thorium resources. For better utilisation of
uranium and to use the available thorium, Fast Breeder Reactor programme is very essential.
A 40 MWt / 13 MWe Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) is in operation at Kalpakkam, since
 1985, and has attained its rated power level of 10.5 MWt in Dec 1993 with small Mark I core.
As a logical follow-up to FBTR, a 500 MWe Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) is
currently under design & development at Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research
(IGCAR). Fast reactors like BN-600, SPX-1 and Monju have capital cost significantly higher
than PWRs. FBRs, for commercial deployment, after reaching maturity through large scale
construction, would be required to have matching unit energy cost with PWRs. Even though
incidents of minor to severe nature have occurred in LMFBRs, their operating experience
provides a very important input for design simplification, improving reliability, enhancing
safety and achieving cost reduction. This paper describes in brief the summary of LMFBR
operating experience and details the design features of PFBR as influenced by LMFBR
operating experience.


2. SUMMARY OF LMFBR OPERATING EXPERIENCE

•   Considerable experience ( ~ 200 reactor-years) has been gained in the design and
    operation of sodium systems. Corrosion of structural materials in reactor grade sodium is
    negligible and purification of sodium for oxygen control by cold trapping is very
    satisfactory. It has been possible to maintain the purity of sodium in a stable manner.
•   Performance of stainless steel of type 304 and 316 for sodium components is excellent.
    Failure of welds have occurred in the stabilised grade 321 in PFR [1] & Phenix [2] and
    15 Mo3 ferritic steel in SNR-300 & SPX-1 [2]. Performance of elevated temperature
    components on the whole is satisfactory indicating that failure mode of creep-fatigue can
    be well taken care of in design.


                                                                                            181
      Very high burnup (192 GWd/t) has been achieved for mixed oxide fuel compared to the
      initial target value of about 62 GWd/t [3] and there has been very few fuel pin failures.
      This gives scope for significant decrease in fuel cycle cost. The smaller number of fuel
      pin failures has led to very clean sodium circuits which has also contributed to low
      radiological impact.
      The performance of sodium pumps has been very good. The only incident of concern has
      been oil leaks with a major incident occurring in PFR [4]. Other problems like excessive
      vibrations, seizure, malfunctioning of speed control etc have been understood.
      IHX performance except for Phenix is excellent. Failure of Phenix secondary sodium
      outlet header is well understood [5].
      Successful operation of steam generator (SG) holds the key to achievement of high
      capacity factors. SG requires the high quality during manufacture and a sensitive leak
      detection system for sodium-water reaction detection and mitigation. PFR incident of
      failure of 40 tubes of superheater has led to redefinition of design basis leak for SG from
      the earlier considered incident of double ended rupture of one tube [6].
      Fuel handling incidents have led to interventions & outages in some reactors including
      FBTR where bypassing of interlocks was done. These incidents call for under sodium
      scanning before every fuel handling.
      Radiation dose to operating personnel and radioactivity releases to the environment are
      significantly less compared to PWRs [7]. It is thus possible to define a low target person-
      Sivert for LMFBR and to reduce the shielding in controlled access areas to enable cost
      reduction.
      In-service inspection (ISI) is an important means to assess structural integrity and needs
      attention in design in particular, for main vessel & SG.
      Reactivity incidents have occurred in some reactors and in spite of the best efforts, fully
      validated explanation has not been possible. It is worthwhile to have a design with less
      potential for such incidents.
      Fuel meltdown incident has occurred in Fermi due to blockage of subassembly at inlet
      and at EBRI due to inward bowing of core subassemblies.
      Incidents of sodium leak show need for greater care in auxiliary sodium circuits to
      minimise failure by thermal striping. There is a need to develop sodium resistant concrete
      to minimise damages to structures in case of sodium leaks.
      High capacity factors are achievable in LMFBR with sound designs as experienced in
       EBR II, BOR-60, Phenix (initial years) and BN-600.
       The capital cost of FBR is about 1.5 to 2.5 times that of thermal reactors and significant
       cost reduction is essential for its successful deployment. Cost reduction measures adopted
       in LMFBR include elimination of ex-vessel sodium storage, decrease in number & size of
       components of heat transport system, compact layouts, increasing operating temperature,
       increasing plant life and increasing fuel burnup.


3. FBTR OPERATING EXPERIENCE
       Details of operating experience and incidents that have occurred in FBTR are covered
in a companion paper.




182
4. PFBR DESIGN FEATURES

4.1 Main options


4.1.1 Reactor Power
       The successful operation of 500 MWe thermal power plants in India has enabled to
fix PFBR reactor power as 500 MWe. Large sized FBR have not indicated any technological
problems because of reactor size. Specific capital cost is lower for 500 MWe than for a lower
power, say 250 MWe. The design and development efforts needed for 500 MWe and 250
MWe plants are comparable. Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHWR) of 500 MWe are
under construction in India. Constructability of 500 MWe PFBR components has been
assessed and adequate industrial capability exists within the country.


4.1.2 Fuel
        A proven fuel cycle is very essential for PFBR. Though mixed carbide fuel has been
used for FBTR due to non availability of enriched uranium, risks associated with carbide fuel
fabrication, higher cost coupled with limited burnup potential & limited experience on
reprocessing of the fuel have led to adoption of mixed oxide (MOX) fuel. This fuel has
shown excellent performance with respect to burnup, has well proven reprocessing
technology and has also been used in most of the large sized FBR.


4.1.3 Loop vs Pool concept
       Better safety features of the pool concept due to the high thermal inertia of the large
mass of sodium in the pool, containment of all radioactivity in a single vessel with no nozzles
leading to high integrity of the primary circuit, reliable decay heat removal by independent
dedicated sodium loops and satisfactory performance of pool type power reactors abroad
have led to adoption of pool type concept for PFBR. The shortcomings of the pool concept as
regard to large size of components of reactor assembly, complex thermo-hydraulics of hot
and cold pool, interdependence of primary circuit component's construction and maintenance
are well recognized and have been looked into.


4.1.4 Operating Temperatures
        In order to reduce the unit energy cost, it is essential to adopt a superheated steam
cycle. Operating experience of elevated temperature components in FBR indicates that creep-
fatigue damage can be well taken care of in the design. Thermo-hydraulic analysis needs to
be detailed to have complete knowledge of thermal loading.
       Plant temperatures have been arrived at based on structural analysis of hot leg
components, in particular Control Plug, limiting clad hot spot temperature to 973 K (700 ° C),
steam generator material as T91 and optimisation studies on heat exchangers (IHX & SG)
costs and sodium pumping cost. The temperatures of 820 K (547° C) at hot pool, 670 K
(397° C) at cold pool, 628 K (355° C) at IHX inlet, 798 K (525° C) at IHX outlet and steam



                                                                                            183
conditions of 16.7 MPa / 763 K (490° C) at turbine inlet have been chosen. The improved
cycle efficiency with higher temperature difference across HXs result in reduction in unit
energy cost.


4.1.5   Structural Materials


4.1.5.1 Clad and Wrapper
       20 % CW D9 material which has shown excellent performance with oxide fuel has
been selected for clad tubes and wrapper. Irradiation of indigenously produced material is
planned in FBTR. Wrapper in Cr-Mo grade is also envisaged for future cores of PFBR.


4.1.5.2 Material for Hot leg and Cold leg components in sodium circuits
         SS 321 has been rejected due to unsatisfactory performance in FBRs and thermal
power stations. SS 347 is expected to behave similar to SS 321 at elevated temperatures. SS
316 LN, which has good high temperature characteristics and provides freedom from
sensitisation in as welded state - an important aspect to avoid risk of IGSCC, in the coastal
site selected, has been chosen for hot leg components such as inner vessel, control plug, IHX
and hot leg of secondary sodium piping. For the cold leg components and secondary sodium
piping, SS 304 LN material is found to be adequate. However, use of SS 316 LN for cold leg
components and piping would be given consideration where risk of mixup of materials exists.
Choice of a single grade also reduces the R&D efforts required.


4.1.5.3 Material for Steam generators
        Modified 9 Cr-lMo (T91) has been chosen for steam generators because of its
satisfactory strength at high temperature, freedom from stress corrosion cracking (problem
with stainless steels both for chloride and caustic environment) and risk of decarburisaiton
(problem with 2.25 Cr-lMo).


4.1.6     Number of Turbogenerator (TG)   sets
        Operating experience from nearly 15 TG sets of 500 MWe capacity, currently in
operation in India, is excellent. A single TG set has been selected instead of two from
considerations of reduction in capital cost and improved capacity factor arising from
reduction in outages due to maintenance.


4.2 Core Design
       The active core consists of 181 fuel subassemblies with two enrichment zones, of
which 85 with -21%   PuO2 content are in the inner enrichment zone and 96 with ~ 28% PuO2
content are in the outer enrichment zone. Each fuel subassembly consists of 217 helium
bonded pins of 6.6 mm outside diameter. Each pin has 1000 mm column of MOX,        300 mm
each of upper and lower depleted UOi blanket columns and lower fission gas plenum (fig. 1).



184
                4500




      CO
       I
                                             AT BUTTONS A/F    134.7^
                                 1
                       <    CO   N5           HEX.   MAX A/F   131.6
           m           0
                       c
           r~          z m
                       p
                            g
                           C
                       ^ ^ m
                           r~
           GO          ^
                            m 2
                                        o
           d                            "D
           CD          > •Si CO
           >           5 bi p
           GO          o UT p
           GO                b en
                       o         en
                       -q          H-
                       KJ n:   o
                       o m     b
                       o  r-   N3
           CD             o  .g
                       3
                       3 i— =i
oo                     • x ^E
t/l
The fuel pellets are of annular type which enables faster rise to full power. Absence of fuel
redistribution & restructuring because of high density helps in attaining high burnup.
        There are 3 rows of radial blanket subassemblies and 12 absorber rods arranged in
two rings with 9 constituting the Control & safety rods(CSR) and 3 constituting the Diverse
safety rods (DSR). Boron carbide with 63% / 50% enriched BIO for CSR/DSR respectively is
chosen as the absorber material. The control & safety rods are of vented type and this type of
design has performed well in FBTR and in other reactors.
        Total blockage of SA due to external debris is a low probable event and is taken care
by the arrangement of radial inlet of coolant and multiple holes inlet in grid plate sleeves /
multiple slots inlet in the SA foot. Total blockage of fuel and blanket SA at outlet is ruled out
by provision of an adaptor, which ensures an alternate path for coolant flow. This consists of
a annular cylindrical piece with slots provided for sodium flow and this is screwed to the
inside of the top portion of the SA. Two sets of 3 nos. of holes are provided on the SA hexcan
outside the adaptor. In case of a total blockage of the flow path at the top of the SA, these
holes along with the slots in the adaptor provides alternate flow path for sodium. The design
objective is to avoid sodium boiling. During normal operation, a small flow of about 0.2 % of
the flow through a SA leaks through the above holes.
       Simple naturally restrained core concept has been adopted which gives negative
power coefficient and which also avoids inward radial movement of core subassemblies due
to bowing. Use of a separate core barrel has been avoided.


4.3 Reactor Assembly
        The reactor assembly consists of main vessel, safety vessel, core support structure,
grid plate, inner vessel, roof slab, rotatable plugs and control plug (fig. 2). The main vessel
(diameter 12.9 m) contains the entire primary sodium circuit including the 1100 t of primary
sodium. The main vessel is cooled by cold sodium to enhance its structural reliability. The
main vessel cooling arrangement has been checked for flow induced vibration behavior. The
safety vessel follows the shape of the main vessel with a 300 mm nominal gap. The inner
vessel separates the hot and cold pools of sodium. Argon gas seal for IHX-Inner vessel
sealing has been avoided to minimise the chances of reactivity addition and a mechanical seal
design with piston rings has been selected (fig. 3). The seal assembly uses two piston rings
and is provided as an integral part of the IHX. It has a face to face contact with a flange
integral with IHX standpipe in inner vessel. Compression springs are used to apply the
required force in order to minimise leakage of sodium between the flange faces. Hydraulic
experiments are planned to verify the quantity of sodium leaking across the seal assembly.
       A single grid plate is used to support the core and shielding subassemblies and a fully
bolted construction has been adopted. The grid plate has four inlet pipes with a pair of
nozzles connected to each of the two primary pumps.
    The top shield includes roof slab and two rotatable plugs. Warm roof concept is adopted
for top shield to minimise sodium deposition in the annular gaps. The roof slab is a box type
structure filled with concrete as the shielding material. It supports the main vessel, primary
sodium pumps, IHX, and direct reactor heat exchangers (DHX) of the decay heat removal
system. Use of liquid metal seals has been avoided in order to reduce the rotatable support



186
                                                                                                    33500




    01. MAIN VESSEL              06. CORE
                                                  LEGEND                    10. IN-VESSEL TRANSFER MACHINE
    02. SAFETY     VESSEL        07. TOP SHIELD                             11. INTERMEDIATE HEAT EXCHANGER
    03. CORE SUPPORT STRUCTURE   08. CONTROL PLUG                           12. IHX MECHANICAL SEAL
    04. GRID PLATE               09. CONTROL & SAFETY ROD DRIVE MECHANISM   13. PRIMARY PUMP & DRIVE
    05. CORE CATCHER                                                        14. NEUTRON DETECTORS

P.V.SELLAPERUMAL             PFBR REACTOR ASSEMBLY

                                             FIG. 2
                                                                                                              187
                                               -IHX AXIS



      Tn                               •rf                                              SEAL HOUSING


      i i i   i   I   lit   i   i   i i i
      JJ_IJ_l_iii_U_LLL



                                                  SEE DETAIL-A




                                                   INNER VESSEL
                                                   STAND PIPE




                                                                  SEE DETAIL-B




                                             >///,'j                             DETAIL-A
                      DETAIL-B
              IV-IHX MECHANICAL SEAL ARRANGEMENT

                                                           FIG-3
188
arrangement width (and hence main vessel diameter) and elastomer seals are used to seal the
argon cover gas.
    The Control plug supports the 12 absorber drive mechanisms, sleeves which house
thermocouples for measurement of outlet temperature of each fuel subassembly and three
selector valves with sodium sampling from each fuel SA for failed fuel location. Use of
bellows has been avoided for CSRDM to extend the life of the mechanisms and to enhance
reactor availability, as bellows failure has been responsible for replacement of CRDMs in
reactors using this concept. V-ring seals are used between the stationary sheath and mobile
assembly of CSRDM. The core thermocouples are located at a fixed distance of 90 mm from
the top of the SA during reactor operation and no Core Cover Plate Mechanism (CCPM) is
provided as in FBTR. Thermohydraulic analysis indicates that the thermocouples are
immersed in their respective streams at all power levels thereby ensuring adequacy of
temperature measurement.
    Though the Total Instantaneous Blockage (TIB) of a single SA is categorised as Beyond
Design Basis Event (BDBE), an internal core catcher is provided below the core support
structure. This is designed for retention of core debris arising out of meltdown of 7 SA based
on the SCARABEE tests which have indicated melt propogation at the most to the
neighboring six SA.


4.4 Sodium circuits & Components
    Detailed optimisation studies on number of loops/components led to the choice of 2-loop
concept. Due to adoption of design improvements, the increase in size of the components
when the number of loops is decreased is not large and is within the industrial capacity. The
reduction in the number of components helps to reduce the capital cost, construction time and
the outage time due to generic design failure/inspection/repair of components. Hence the
capacity factor of the reactor is expected to be marginally higher for the case with lesser
number of loops. Reduction in number of loops also reduces the space required for layout of
secondary sodium system components. Hence, 2 loop arrangement has been chosen with two
primary pumps and 2 secondary pumps. 2 IHX per loop has been selected based on the
economics and is in line with other pool type reactors built so far. The number of SG/loop is
based on optimisation analysis of capital cost and outage cost in case of a leak, with due
consideration to construction schedule while permitting (N-l) SG modular operation and 4
SG/loop has been chosen.
    The Primary pump is a top suction, single stage, centrifugal pump without non-return
valve (NRV)(fig. 4), powered by a 3600 kW motor with speed variation of 20-100% of
nominal speed. It delivers a flow of 4.13 nrVs at a head of 75 mlc at an operating speed of
680 rpm. A squirrel cage induction motor fed from current source inverter is selected. A pony
motor is provided to run the pump at 20% speed. It is not envisaged to operate the reactor
with only one pump in operation. Further, analysis indicates that the flow through the core is
adequate in case of one pipe rupture (category 4 event) even without NRV. Hence, NRV is
eliminated giving the advantage of increased submergence (for a given main vessel height)
thereby permitting higher pump operating speed. Elimination of NRV also increases
reliability of the path for decay heat removal. A margin of 1.24 is specified on NPSH
           / NPSHjo/,,), which ensures absence of cavitation erosion and gives a pump life equal



                                                                                            189
                                         MOTOR




                                         FLYWHEEL




                                         FLEXIBLE
                                         COUPLING

                                         THRUST
                                         BEARING



                                         MECH.
                                         SEAL


                                         SPHERICAL
                                         BEARING




      8060




                                         HYDROSTATIC
                                         BEARING




                                         IMPELLER



                                         DIFFUSER




             PRIMARY   SODIUM     PUMP


                       FIG.   4


190
to that of the reactor. The hydrostatic bearing journal is keyed to the shaft and is also
provided with a spacer preventing danger of its slippage due to thermal shocks. It has not
been possible to avoid use of oil for lubrication of seals and bearings. Hence, efforts are made
to avoid entry of oil into sodium. Any possibility of oil leak into the primary circuit is
avoided by appropriate surveillance methods as well as by provision of an oil catch pot of
sufficient size to accommodate the entire oil capacity. The pump is supported on a spherical
seat arrangement to accommodate the differential thermal expansion. Full-scale hydraulic
testing of the prototype pump is being done.
    The secondary pump is of centrifugal type, mixed flow design delivering a flow of
3.34 m3/s at a head of 65 mlc at an operating speed of 960 rpm (fig. 5) and is located in the
cold leg at a lower elevation with respect to SG. Locating the pump in the cold leg of the
secondary circuit is more economical with lower piping costs. The normal cover gas pressure
in the pump tank is 0.3 MPa(g). Any danger of flooding of the secondary pump is prevented
by a suitably designed piston ring seal (in the upper slip joint) separating the high pressure
pump discharge from the relatively low pressure cover gas space. This seal will be
experimentally tested to validate its design.
    The IHX is a vertical, counter current flow, shell and tube heat exchanger (fig. 6). Each
IHX has 3000 straight tubes (19 mm OD x 0.8 mm WT) with primary sodium on shell side
and secondary sodium on the tube side. The tubes are arranged in circumferential pitch. A
variable flow distribution is provided inside the IHX tubes with a higher flow on the outer
rows to improve the thermohydraulic behaviour of the tube bundle. A mixing device is also
provided at the secondary outlet to reduce the temperature differences between inner and
outer shell of the secondary outlet header. Absence of flow induced vibration of tube bundle
and the drain pipe in the downcomer have been verified by theoretical analysis.
    Steam reheat with integrated once-through design for the steam generators has been
selected. This has been favoured over sodium reheat as the savings in SG cost, reduction in
construction time and ease of design & operation outweigh the marginal advantage in
efficiency associated with sodium reheat.
    The SG selected is a vertical countercurrent, shell and tube heat exchanger with sodium
on the shell side (fig. 7). No cover gas is provided in the SG and a surge tank is provided on
the upstream side of the SG. This arrangement is less costly. Experience of multiple SG /
loop without cover gas in other reactors is also good. Straight tube design with an expansion
bend in each tube located in the bottom portion of the SG above the sodium outlet nozzle has
been selected to take care of differential expansion between shell and tubes as well as
amongst tubes. Sodium enters the SG through a single inlet nozzle, flows upwards in the
annular region & top inlet plenum before entering the tube bundle. A flow distribution device
is located in the annular region to bring uniformity in tube bundle flow. Sodium leaving the
SG exits through the bottom outlet plenum and a single outlet nozzle. An orifice is provided
at the water inlet of each tube of SG from stability consideration. The tubes are supported at
various locations by formed type tube bundle support arrangements. Tube to tubesheet joint is
of internal bore weld type with raised spigot to enhance reliability (crevice free and
radiographable) of this critical weld joint. Long seamless tubes are used in order to reduce the
number of tube to tube welds. The inspections proposed for each joint include dye penetrant
testing, radiography using anode (microfocus) X-ray and helium leak testing. It is also



                                                                                           191
                                    MOTOR




                                    MECHANICAL SEAL

                                    TOP BEARING




                                    MECHANICAL SEAL



                              /ffffffffffff
                                        INNER SHELL
                                        (REMOVABLE ASSEMBLY)
                                    SODIUM LEVEL

                                    OUTER SHELL (FIXED)

                                    HOLLOW SHAFT


                                    UPPER SLIP JOINT




                                    REAR SHROUD DISCHARGE




                                    FRONT SHROUD DISCHARGE
                                    WEARING RING
                                    HYDROSTATIC BEARING

                                    LOWER SLIP JOINT




      SECONDARY SODIUM PUMP




             FIG.   5


192
                     TIG WITHOUT FILLER WIRE


      SEC. No




     -SEC.   Na




                                TUBE TO TUBE SHEET JOINT
     -FLANGE OD 2520




                                                         LAST BELT



 —SLEEVE VALVE

  -MIXING DEVICE
  -TUBE SHEET

  -PRIMARY SODIUM

 I—MECHANICAL SEAL                                    ISHROUD
 I


                                         THERMAL SHIELD




 — SHROUD OD 1850


  -TUBE OD 19x0.8 THK




 — PRIMARY SODIUM

        SHEET                                  FLOW DISTRIBUTION
                                               PLATE



INTERMEDIATE HEAT EXCHANGER


                   FIG. 6

                                                                193
                MANHOLE                      STEAM
                                          /'OUTLET
                                                        7.

        TOP TUBESHEET
                                                                  -SPIGOT
                                                                      SQUARE
       THERMAL SHIELDS-                                           "BUTT JOINT

                                                                  -TUBE
               SODIUM
                 INLET
                                                        TYP. TUBE TO
                                    r f
                                                       TUBESHEET JOINT
           TUBE BUNDLE                      -OD 855
             SUPPORT
          MAIN SUPPORT
                 OD 1500



                    TUBE
        OD 17.2 x 2.3Thk. •
                  547Nos.

                                                      SUPPORT - Y FORGING



        EXPANSION BEND



                                                                          BELT


                 SODIUM
                OUTLET                                               SHELL




      BOTTOM TUBESHEET
                                                      TUBE BUNDLE SUPPORTS
                  ORIFICE

                                          \ WATER
                MANHOLE                     INLET

                              STEAM GENERATOR
                                   FIG.    7

194
envisaged to postweld heat treat individual joints to avoid risk of stress corrosion cracking
associated with hard welds in Cr-Mo steel. Top & bottom tubesheets are protected by thermal
shields. Sodium inlet and outlet shell junctions are in the form of pullouts. Manhole is
provided on water-steam dished heads to permit access for in-service inspection of tubes and
to carry out tube plugging, if required. The design basis accident for SG takes into account
the effect of large leaks. Actuation of both the rupture discs located at the inlet and outlet of
SG governs the number of failed tubes for leak analysis. Design basis leak is taken as
instantaneous double ended guillotine rupture of 3 tubes at the top location of the SG. The
reaction products are discharged to the secondary sodium storage tank.
    Thermal striping has been the cause of some of the sodium leaks in auxiliary circuits.
Mixing devices has been provided to ensure that sodium streams mix with temperature
differences lower than the established safe limits.
         Oil systems have been avoided wherever possible to minimise the risk of oil fires. The
quick actuating valves on the water steam side and sodium side are pneumatic driven.
Cooling is by nitrogen for primary cold trap and by air for secondary cold trap. For austenitic
stainless steel piping, leak before break concept is used where leak monitoring provision
exists. To minimise sodium fires, all the sodium pipes within the reactor containment
building are double walled. The dump valves are duplicated in sodium circuits to enhance
reliability of dumping, in case of a sodium leak.
       It is envisaged to have one primary pump, one secondary pump and a SG as spare.
        Operation with one secondary loop at maximum power of 50 % is also planned in
case of non availability of one loop.


4.5 Core components handling
        In-vessel handling is carried out using two rotatable plugs and an offset (fixed) arm
type fuel handling machine (IVTM). An ultrasonic scanner is provided in order to check
projection of any S A/absorber rods above the top of the core before starting in-vessel transfer
operation. Additionally, strict administrative control on interlocks is to be provided. An
Inclined fuel transfer machine (IFTM) is used to transfer the subassemblies from the main
vessel to outside.
        Ex-vessel sodium storage for removal of decay heat of SA has been avoided and the
SA are stored in in-vessel storage locations within the main vessel. The spent fuel
subassemblies are stored inside the main vessel for a period of 8 months till the decay power
reduces to less than 5 kW and are then shifted to spent fuel storage bay (SFSB). SFSB is a
water filled double concrete walled tank.

4.6 Decay heat removal
    In case off-site power is available, the decay heat is removed through normal heat
transport path of secondary sodium and water/steam circuits. Additionally, an independent
safety grade passive direct reactor cooling system consisting of 4 independent circuits of
6 MWt nominal capacity each has been provided. Each of these circuits comprises of one
sodium to sodium heat exchanger dipped in reactor hot pool, one sodium to air heat



                                                                                             195
exchanger, associated piping and tanks. Except for the dampers provided on the air side, this
system is entirely passive. A slope of 3.5 % is provided for the finned tubes of sodium-air
heat exchanger in decay heat removal circuit in order to avoid gas locking.


4.7 Instrumentation and Control (I & C)
        I & C, though not having significant impact on capital cost, needs detailed
consideration in design as it demands considerable efforts in execution and it has a strong
bearing on reactor availability. 2 loop design selected helps in reduction of sodium process
instrumentation. The list of trip parameters is based on analysis. In principle, reactor should
be shutdown under all design basis events using two independent trip parameters. Reactor
shutdown is based on Lowering of rods (LOR) or by SCRAM. Two chromel-alumel
thermocouples are provided at the outlet of each fuel SA and are used for SCRAM. Global
Delayed neutron detectors (DND) and gaseous fission product detection are used for
detection of failed fuel. Only global DND is used for SCRAM. 3 Failed fuel identification
modules (FFIM) are provided for locating the SA with failed fuel pins. A bypass
electromagnetic flowmeter is provided at the outlet of each primary pump discharge and the
flow signal is used for SCRAM.


4.8 In-Service Inspection (ISI)
        In-service inspection and monitoring is based on the requirements of ASME section
XI, Div 3. For the main vessel, in addition to ASME requirements of continuous monitoring,
ultrasonic examination is planned to be carried out through the main vessel - safety vessel
interspace (300 mm nominal gap). A periscope is provided for visual examination of reactor
internals. Eddy current inspection is under development for the SG tubes. SG tube size and
expansion bend design takes into account this inspection requirement. Ultrasonic examination
is planned for the dissimilar joints of the roof slab - main vessel and SG transition joint. The
subject of ISI for other reactor components important to safety is under study. For the safety
related reactor assembly components, which are non-inspectable, an additional factor of
safety in design is envisaged.


4.9 Reactor Containment Building
       Though the whole core accident is categorised as BDBE, a containment is provided
based on the design condition of mechanical energy release of 100 MJ in case of core melt
down accident. It has been checked that the main vessel and top shield can withstand this
accident. The amount of sodium that is ejected into the containment building does not exceed
1000  kg and preliminary analysis indicate a pressure rise of ~ 10 kPa resulting from the
sodium spray fire inside the containment. Aircraft crash is not a design basis event for the
containment as the site selected meets the screening distance value of the regulatory code.


4.10   Radiation Protection
        The siting, design of the plant and the operating procedures are intended to ensure that
the radiation exposure to plant personnel and to the public resulting from the plant operation




196
are controlled so as to comply with the dose limits prescribed by Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board (AERB). Adequate shielding is provided wherever required to meet the pescribed dose
limits. The targeted collective dose for the plant is 0.5 person-Sv/a (50 man-rem/a). For the
general public, the exposure is limited to 0.1 mSv/a (1/10th of admissible dose is apportioned
for PFBR).

5.0 SUMMARY
    Systematic efforts have been made to take care of the operating experience from
LMFBR into the design of 500 MWe PFBR.
       FBTR operating experience has improved the confidence level in the design and
operation of core, sodium systems, control rod drive mechanisms, fuel handling machines,
steam water system and SG leak detection system.
        Well proven mixed oxide fuel is chosen as the reference fuel. Pool type concept has
been adopted. The plant operating temperatures have been arrived at based on detailed
structural analysis of the hot leg components and result in reduced unit energy cost. SS 304
LN / 316 LN is used for sodium systems while modified 9 Cr - 1 Mo is used for SG. 2 loop
concept with 2 Primary pumps, 4 IHX and 4 SG per loop has been selected to reduce capital
costs and to improve capacity factor. Reactivity incidents have occurred in some reactors and
in spite of the best efforts, fully validated explanation has not been possible. Argon gas seal
for IHX-Inner vessel sealing has been eliminated and a seal design with piston rings has been
selected. Improvement of thermal hydraulics of IHX and provision of a mixing device at
secondary outlet have been made. Steam generator design selected takes into consideration
the lessons learnt from other operating steam generators and it is expected to realise a more
reliable SG.
        The design features selected for PFBR are expected to yield an economic, safe and
reliable design with improved capacity factor.


                                         REFERENCES

[1] C. Picker, A.S. Fraser, "Experience of cracking in austenitic stainless components of the UK
    prototype fast reactor", Int. J. Pres. Vessel & Piping, 65,1996, 283-293.
[2] L. Martin et al., "Leak before Break operating experience from European fast reactors",
    Proceedings of International conference on Fast reactor and related fuel cycles, FR-91, , Kyoto,
    Japan, Oct 28-Nov 1,1991.
[3] M. Broomfield, "PFR : a retrospective", Nuclear Energy, 33, No. 4, Aug 1994, 245-248.
[4] A.M. Judd, "Leakage of Pump bearing oil intothe PFR primary sodium, June 1991", IAEA
    IWGFR TCM on Material coolant interactions and material movement & relocation in Liquid
    meal fast reactors, Orai, Ibarki, Japan, 6-9 June 1994, (IWGFR/89).
[5] J.L. Carbonner, A. Lapicore, "Ten years operating experience with the large components of the
    Phenix plant", Proc. of FBRs - Experience and Trends, Vol 2, Lyons, France, 22-26 July 1985.
[6] R. Currie et al., "The under sodium leak in the PFR superheater 2 in February 1987", IWGFR
    specialist's meeting on steam generator failure and failure propagation experience, France, 26-28
    Sept 1990.
[7] M. Sauvage et al., "Overview of European fast reactor operating experience", Proc. of
    International conference on Fast reactor and related fuel cycles, FR-91, Kyoto, Japan, Oct 28-
    Novl, 1991.




                                                                                                 197
                                                                                                 XA0056259
        SAFETY DESIGN ANALYSES OF
        KOREA ADVANCED LIQUID METAL REACTOR

        S.D SUK, C.K. PARK
        KALIMER Development Program,
        Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute,
        Taejon, Republic of Korea



         Abstract

         The national long-term R&D program updated in 1997 requires Korea Atomic Energy
         Research Insutute(KAERI) to complete by the year 2006 the basic design of Korea
         Advanced Liquid Metal Reactor (KALIMER), along with supporting R&D work, with the
         capability of resolving the issue of spent fuel storage as well as with significantly enhanced
         safety KALIMER is a 150 MWe pool-type sodium cooled prototype reactor that uses
         metallic fuel The conceptual design is currently under way to establish a self consistent
         design meeting a set of the major safety design requirements for accident prevention Some
         of current emphasis include those for inherent and passive means of negative reactivity
         insertion and decay heat removal, high shutdown reliability, prevention of and protection
         from sodium chemical reaction, and high seismic margin, among others All of these
         requirements affect the reactor design significantly and involve supporting R&D programs
         of substance This paper summarizes some of the results of engineering and design
         analyses performed for the safety of KALIMER


1. Introduction

     As of the end of 1997. Korea's total nuclear capacity was more than 10 GWe, with 12 units in
operation In addition, 8 units are currently under construction It is expected that the country's present
nuclear capacity will be more than doubled by the year 2010, by which time nuclear generation will
account for 40 % of total electric power production         Nuclear generation currently stands at 35 % of
the total The heavy dependence on nuclear energy raises the issue of spent nuclear fuel storage or
disposal as well as that of utilization of uranium resources        To date, more than 3,000 MTU of spent
fuels have been stored in At-Reactor(AR) pools of the 12 operating nuclear power plants Taking only
nuclear power plants currently in operation or under construction into account, the cumulative amount
of spent fuels is estimated to reach up to about 26,000 MTU by 2030


     From the viewpoint that liquid metal reactors(LMRs) have the potential of enhanced safety
utilizing inherent safety characteristics and of resolving spent fuel storage problems through
proliferation-resistant actmide recycling, LMRs appear to be the most promising nuclear power option
of the future     In this context, the KALIMER development program was launched as a national
long-term R&D program in 1992 and has been earned out by Korea Atomic Energy Research
Institute(KAERI) since then As such, the objective of the KALIMER Program was set to develop an
inherently and ultimately safe environmentally friendly, proliferation-resistant and economically
viable fast reactor concept




                                                                                                          199
      Up until July 1997 efforts had been concentrated on the development of               basic sodium
technologies and design methodologies unique to the LMR design and operating characteristics An
initial design concept also was proposed through the feasibility study of a number of innovative design
features as well as various proven design features As a result , KALIMER was defined to be a 150
Mwe pool-type sodium cooled prototype reactor that uses metallic fuels         In 1997, the KALIMER
program plan was updated to call for the completion of the basic design and supporting R&D work by
2006 An effort is being made to establish by early 2000, not only a self-consistent conceptual design
of system configuration arrangement and key features satisfying design requirements, but more
importantly computer codes and methods specific for KALIMER engineering and design analysesfl]


      At early phase of the conceptual design, an emphasis     has been made to come up with the self-
consistent design meeting      a set of the major safety design requirements to avoid "unusual
occurrences", or arrest them One of the major requirements of current emphasis is that KALIMER
shall be of inherent passive means of negative reactivity insertion and decay heat removal, sufficient to
place the reactor system in a safe stable state for bounding ATWS events without significant damage
to the core or reactor system structure Even with the inherent reactor shutdown requirement, the
reactivity control and shutdown systems are required to result in extremely high shutdown reliability
As for all the other sodium cooled reactors, the structures, systems, and components of KALIMER are
to be designed and located to minimize the probability and consequences of             sodium chemical
reactions Seismic isolation is also required to achieve high seismic margins All these safety design
requirements affect the design significantly and demand supporting R&D programs of substance


      For the analysis of KALIMER's inherent safety, a plant-wide transient analysis code SSC-K is
being developed Models for reactivity feedback effects and pool thermal-hydraulics have been
developed into the code and a preliminary analysis of UTOP and ULOF/LOHS performance has been
attempted Design alternatives have been investigated to improve decay heat removal capability by
passive means, for which functional testings are to be done Seismic base isolation is shown to reduce
seismic response of building and structures significantly and ,therefore, provides a great advantage in
safety as well as economy for the structural design of nuclear power plants Substantial progress has
been made in developing and validating the methodologies, and engineering analyses for the structural
design of the KALIMER are under way An investment is also being made on the other key design
features testing, such as electromagnetic pump , self-actuated shutdown system, and fuelling machine
in reactor vessel Effort continues to be made on the development of basic sodium technologies such
as measurement or detection technique as well as the investigation on thermal-hydraulic and chemical
behavior Engineering and design analyses are also being made to improve IHTS configuration against
sodium chemical reaction


      In the following sections, the major design features of KALIMER are briefly described and
some of results from the safety design analyses and supporting R&D programs are summarized



200
2. Major Design Features of KALIMER

     Table 1 summarizes some of the major design parameters of                    KALIMER, which is currently
under the conceptual design phase A salient feature of its key system designs is briefly described in
the followmg[2]


                                   Table 1 KALIMER Key Design Parameters
  OVERALL                                                PHTS
  Net plant Power, Mwe                    150            Reactor Core I/O Temp,°C      3862/5300
  Core Power, MWt                          392           Total PHTS Flow Rate, kg/s      2143 1
  Gross Plant Efficiency, %              41 5            Primary Pump Type            electromagnetic
  Net Plant Efficiency, %                382             Number of Primary Pumps             4
  Reactor Pool Type
  Number of IHTS Loops                   2
  Safety Shutdown Heat Removal       PSDRS
  Seismic Design            Seismic Isolation Bearing
                                                         IHTS
  CORE                                                   IHX I/O temp , °C             3397/5110
  Core Configuration           Radially Homogeneous      IHTS Total Flow Rate, kg/s       18036
  Core Height, mm                       1000             IHTS Pump Type               Electromagnetic
  Ajaal Blanket Thickness, mm              0             Number of IHXs                      4
  Maximum Core Diameter, mm            3447              Number of SGs                       2
  Fuel Form                          U-10%Zr Alloy
  Enrichments (IC/OC) for             144/200
  Equilibrium Core, %                                    Steam System
  Assembly Pitch, mm                  1612               Steam Flow Rate, kg/s            175 5
  Fuel/Blanket Pins per Assembly      271/127            Steam Temperature , °C           4832
  Cladding Material                    HT9               Steam Pressure, MPa               15 50
  Refueling Interval, months             12




Core and Fuel Assembly
      The KALIMER core system is designed to generate 392 MWt of power The reference core
utilizes a homogeneous core configuration in radial direction with two driver fuel enrichment zones,
surrounded by a layer of blanket assemblies The core layout, shown in Figure 1, consists of 96 driver
fuel assemblies, 42 radial blanket assemblies, 6 control rods, 1 ultimate shutdown system(USS)
assembly self-actuated by a Cune point electromagnet^ gas expansion modules(GEMs), 48 reflector
assemblies, 54 B4C shield assemblies, 72 shield assemblies, and 54 in-vessel storages(IVSs) m an
annular configuration. The m-vessel storages(IVSs) are located between the stainless steel shielding
zones There are no upper or lower axial blankets surrounding the core The reference core has an
active core height of 100 cm and a radial equivalent diameter (including control rods) of 172 cm, the
height-to-diameter ratio (H/D) for the active core becomes 0581 The physically outermost core
diameter of all assemblies is 344 7 cm The core structural material is HT9 It's low irradiation
swelling characteristics permits adequate nuclear performance in a physically small core The fuel pin
is made of sealed HT-9 tubing containing metal fuel slug in columns The fuel is immersed in sodium
for thermal bonding with the cladding A fission gas plenum is located above the fuel slug and sodium
bond The bottom of each fuel pin is a solid rod end plug for axial shielding The driver fuel, blanket
fuel, reflector, and shield assemblies use identical structural components with only the bundle and its
mounting grid changing from one assembly type to the other The control assemblies use outer



                                                                                                          201
hardware (nosepiece. duct and handling socket) that is identical to that in the other assemblies.
Reflector assemblies contain solid HT9 rods. The absorber assemblies use a sliding bundle and a
dashpot




                                                                  (J     Inner Core         30
                                                                  ||?S   Outer Core         66
                                                                  (^) Radial Blanket        42
                                                                  tip    Control Rod            6
                                                                  ^      USS                    1
                                                                  (^)    GEM                    6

                                                                  Q      Reflector          48
                                                                  jjjjl B C Shield          54

                                                                  $$! IVS                  54

                                                                  ^      Shield             72

                                                                                           379




                                     Fig.l. KALIMER Core Layout


assembly within the same outer assembly structure as the other assembly types. In all assemblies, the
pins are in a triangular pitch array. The bottom end of each assembly is formed by the nosepiece which
provides the lower restraint function and the coolant inlet[3].


Reactivity Control and Reactor Shutdown
       Reactivity and power are controlled by means of the control rod system in the driver fuel region
of the core. The control rod design satisfies both the one rod stuck condition and the unit control rod
worth condition against the unprotected transient over-power(UTOP) event. The gas expansion
modules (OEMs) are passive reactivity feedback assemblies that insert negative reactivity into the core
during a loss of flow. The Self-Actuated Shutdown System(SASS) located at the center of the core is
designed as an ultimate shutdown system by using a Curie point electromagnet which loses its
magnetic force holding the shutoff rod when the temperature of the primary sodium reaches the curie
point, hence a passive shutdown can be achieved.


Residual Heat Removal System
       In KALIMER, the shutdown heat removal system is designed with the emphasis on system
reliability to achieve a higher level of plant safety. Safety grade heat removal is achieved by the
Passive Safety Decay Heat Removal System(PSDRS), which consists of the air path around the
containment vessel     and takes the decay heat from the reactor pool          and discharges the heat to the
atmosphere. Normally the decay heat is removed by steam generators and the condenser. During the
maintenance of any IHTS. heat is removed by the remaining IHTS loop. Also there is the Steam
Generator Auxiliary Cooling System(SGACS) to aid the decay heat removal. SGACS induces natural



 202
or forced circulation of atmospheric air past the shell side of steam generator Intensive analysis on the
system performance and design parameters is under progress for system level design optimization


Reactor Structure
     The reactor vessel has overall dimensions of 17 6m height, 7 02m diameter, and 5cm thickness in
preliminary concept design and is composed of a cylindrical shell with an integral hemispherical shell
bottom head The structural integnty and safety of the reactor vessel has been achieved by providing
no penetration nozzle and no attachments other than the core support structure The shape of the core
support structure is skirt-type All equipment like MX, EM Pump FVTM, and UIS are supported by
a reactor head and a rotating plug is adopted for the refueling operation The support barrel, which is a
major component of reactor internal structures serves as a redan to separate the hot sodium pool and
cold sodium pool and as a support of internal structures including the reactor core The containment
vessel, which encloses the reactor vessel, is easy to access from the reactor vault so that the inspection
and maintenance of the vessel can be easily accomplished General arrangements for NSSS and
reactor building are tentatively developed as shown m Fig 2&3


     The seismic base isolation for the rector building using high damping rubber bearings has been
adopted to achieve sufficient structural integnty and economic design of KALIMER, when subjected
to the design basis earthquake such as a honzontal Safe Shutdown Earthquake of 0 3g The
development of a design concept adopting 3 dimensional seismic base isolation is under consideration
to reduce both honzontal and vertical seismic responses




                                                                         IHTS
                                                                         BMP
                                                                       (OD - I S m)




                               TlJ



                                 Fig 2 General Arrangements of NSSS

Heat Transport System
     A superheat steam cycle is implemented to have a high plant efficiency noting that high thermal
efficiency reduces the heat discharge from the plant, resulting in less impact to the environment IHTS

                                                                                                      203
                                                             ~ ^— PSDRS Slacks (4ea)




                   Steam
                   Generator




                   Lower
                   Basemat




                               Fig. 3. General Arrangement of Reactor Building


consists of two loops and each loop is equipped with one steam generator unit to simplify the system
design and increase the plant operation flexibility. For safety, large system thermal inertia is achieved
by using a pool based primary system. Strong emphasis has been given to the prevention and
mitigation of possible sodium-water reaction events for the IHTS piping routing. Valves for isolation
of IHX from the sodium-water reaction products are installed at each IHTS piping penetrating the
containment. The system reliability is improved by using electromagnetic (EM) pumps, which do not
have moving parts, for both of the primary and intermediate coolant pumping. The low momentum
inertia of the EM pump is compensated for by using an auxiliary device which keeps a certain amount
of rotating kinetic energy when the EM pump runs normally but supplies electricity from the rotating
kinetic energy to the EM pumps when the electricity supply to the pumps is interrupted. The operating
temperature and component size were determined to make the net plant thermal efficiency higher than
38%.    Preliminary analysis on economic effects was made in setting up the plant heat balance, as
shown in Figure 4, for system design optimization.


3. Safety Design Analyses and Supporting R&D Programs


3.1 Inherent and Passive Safety Design Analyses


Inherent     Safety Analysis
       A plant-wide transient analysis code is being developed for the analysis of KALIMER's inherent
safety and for the assistance in the development of design, where new design features will frequently
demand not just new data but new models. Transient and safety analysis code SSC-K is under
development based upon the SSC-L code which was developed by BNL for the analysis of loop type



204
                                              IHX                                      TBN




                                             KALIMER Plant Heat Balance


LMRs with oxide-fueled core Models modified and newly developed into the code so far include
models for reactivitv feedback effects and pool thermal-hydraulics In order to verify the logic of the
models developed, and to assess the effectiveness of the inherent safety features based upon the
negative reactivity feedbacks in achieving the safety design objectives of passive safety, a preliminary
analysis of UTOP and ULOF/LOHS performance has been attempted




                                                                          Ccpfier            CflDL


                                                              20-

                                                             -U




                                                             •fO-

                                                              70
               100    200     300      100                                ZJO          3X>           «0

                            Time sec                                                Time; sec



     Fig 5 Reactivities durmg UTOP Event                 Fig 6 Reactivities durmg ULOF/LOHS Event


     Inadvertent withdrawal of the control rod at reactivity insertion rate of 2 cents/second was
assumed for the simulation of UTOP As expected, the reactor power reaches an asymptotic level
higher than that of the initial steady state due to negative feedback effects As shown in Figure 5, the
Doppler effect is an instantaneous and important feedback for UTOP and the net reactivity increases
initially and then decreases to negative values due to feedback effects


     Tnp of all primary pumps with coastdown and the loss of EHX heat removal capability due to
sodium water reaction in the steam generator is assumed for the ULOF combined with LOHS event
Reduction of the core flow is due to the coastdown of primary electromagnetic pumps, and the reactor
power decreases to about 6% of the rated power due to negative reactivities When there were no


                                                                                                          205
OEMs in the core, there occurred a sodium boiling since the reactor power decreases rather slowly and
power-to-flow ratio increases As shown in the Figure 6. the net reactivity is always negative during
the course of the transient due mainly to the largest contribution from GEMs[4]


      According to the preliminary evaluation of the inherent safety characteristics, there is a large
safety margin even under severe unprotected event conditions In order to validate the SSC-K code for
safety analysis, code-to-code comparison calculations and/or calculation against experimental data
need to be performed Potential safety concerns of KALIMER need to be resolved as well Even
though EBR-II experiments have shown the possibility of inherent safety of small metallic cores, there
need to be an investigation in extending the result to larger cores Coastdown characteristics of
electromagnetic pumps has a significant effect on the core safety under loss of flow events, and the
performance of synchronous machine for inertia need to be evaluated Effect of the fluctuating sodium
level inside GEM on reactivity and the effect of GEM reactivity insertion due to the restart of pumps
at low power operation need also to be investigated


      Probability of HCDA occurrence is extremely low due to inherent safety characteristics of
KALIMER, and mechanistic analysis is not planned during the conceptual design stage However,
depending upon the decision of the licensing authority, there may be a developmental effort for the
mechanistic approach in the future A simple model, based upon Modified Bethe-Tait model, is being
developed for the estimation of energy release and available work under HCDA for the analysis of
ultimate safety


Passive Decay Heat Improvement Analysis
      To increase the capacity of decay heat removal of a LMR system that uses a natural air circulation
cooling, feasibility of heat transfer enhancement has been studied for a planar air channel by
introducing a new channel configuration using radiation-convection structures of compact heat
transfer surface For the new channel configuration, the heat transfer mechanism has been investigated
and design guides for the radiation-convection structure have been developed based on the
investigation results Following the developed design guides, a new radiation-convection structure has
been also devised Analysis of the air channel cooling with the new radiation structures revealed
substantial heat transfer enhancement and the feasibility of the heat transfer enhancement with the new
channel configuration design has been confirmed[5]


      In the operation of PSDRS, core decay heat is transferred to the containment vessel, as shown in
Fig 7 and the heat from the containment vessel is dissipated to the air flow which is generated by the
natural circulation from the density difference between the air channel and the environment The heat
dissipation to the air flow is made of two paths One is the direct convection heat transfer from the
containment wall surface and the other is an indirect path to the air In the indirect path, heat is first
transported from the containment vessel surface by radiation to the air separator which separates the
hot air from the incoming cold air Then the heat is dissipated to the air flow by convection


206
   The main resistance in the heat transfer from the core to the air in a system like PSDRS is at the
path from the containment vessel to the air [5]. The improvement of the heat removal capacity of the
system comes to heavily depend on the improvement of the heat transfer in the air channel. Two types
of works have been made to improve the heat removal capacity. One is the modification of the wall
surface to enhance the convection heat transfer coefficient and the other is modification of the air
channel configuration itself. In this study, a new channel configuration is introduced and the feasibility
of the heat   transfer enhancement of the new channel configuration is examined for black body
surfaces. The new channel configuration is shown in Fig. 8 and is provided with lateral compact heat
transfer surface structures. The new channel configuration is different from the conventional
configurations in that it uses compact heat transfer surface and the surface is located across the
channel. Since the configuration is different, the heat transfer mechanism becomes different from that
of previous studies.


     By introducing the lateral structures to the air channel, the radiation heat transfer from the
containment vessel is redistributed. The high heat transfer performance of the radiation-convection
structure (hereafter called as radiation structure) effectively dissipate the heat received by radiation to
the air and the overall heat transfer capacity can be increased depending on the channel system design.
For the geometry of the air channel of black surface and fixed wall temperature condition, the
overall heat transfer is predicted to increase up to 6 times than the heat transfer rate of the same gap
size , and up to about two times than the rate at the optimum gap size without radiation structures


                                                                Air                              Contalnmer
                                                                                                   Vessel
       Air Out                                               Separator               Radiation
                                            Air In                                   structure
      00                                A                                                          ' l',''"Ar!'      t]
                                                                                                                        i't",
                                                                                                    i! ,;l','iiii'!''4,Lil



                                                                                     u



                                                                 w                                            e


                                                                                     1




                                                                              T              r

                                                                                  air flow

    Fig. 7. Analysis domain & Heat Transfer Path Network              Fig. 8. Radiation Structure


3.2 Seismic Isolation Study


     Some essential results of the seismic base isolation studies for KALIMER are summarized in this
section.


                                                                                                                        207
LRB and Shake Table Test
       For the rubber specimen and     laminated   rubber bearing(LRB) tests, various effects such as the
shear strain, the loading rate, the cyclic loading, and so on are investigated. In these tests, the LRB
being developed in KAERI shows good mechanical characteristics applicable to KALIMER. In the
shaking table tests for the seismically isolated structure, it is confirmed that the seismically isolated
structure produces significant reductions of the seismic responses compared with the case of non-
isolated structure. Structural dynamic test for base isolated structure equipped with 2 dimensional 4-
1/8 scale high damping rubber bearings were performed using 30 ton-6 dof shaker. Fig. 9 shows test
model structure and seismic response results at upper slab of the test model to artificial time history
input of SSE0.3g[6].




                                                                                 Fr.quincy [Hz|.



                               lest Model                 Test Results of Isolated and Non-isolated Test Model
                                                                 to Artificial Time History OJg & O.lSg




                           Fig. 9. KALIMER Seismic Isolation Test Program


Reactor Building Analyses
       To obtain the time history of the seismic responses of reactor building, a lumped-mass beam
model is developed. The model is composed of two sticks; the one is for the reactor building and the
other is for the reactor support structure. The time history responses for the non-isolated and isolated
reactor buildings are calculated for an artificial time history earthquake generated by using the seismic
design spectrum curve of US NRC RG1 60. Design basis earthquakes for KALIMER are SSE 0.3g for
horizontal and 0.2g for vertical direction, and QBE 0.15g for horizontal and O.lg for vertical direction
respectively. The isolation frequency of reactor building is 0.5 Hz and the equivalent damping of LRB
is 12%. The lumped-mass model of the reactor building is presented in Fig. 10


       The total weight is about 68,000 tons. The 9 beam elements for the reactor building and the 3
 beam elements for the reactor support structure are used. The maximum acceleration responses of the



 208
non-isolated and isolated reactor buildings for the honzontal and -vertical earthquake data are shown m
Table 2



                                                         /]\ R e a c t o r B u i l d in l




                                                               5      R e .1 c to r & S u p p o r t S t r u c t u r e




                                                                   Base M a I



                                                                                       Isolator




                            Fig JO Lumped mass-beam models ofKALIMER building

           Table 2 Accerations and Displacements of Reactor Building Under ATH Earthquake

                                        X-Direction(g)                   Y-Direction(g)                                   2-Vertical (g)
                                                                                                                                       2D
          Location                      Non-      Isolate                Non-                Isolate                      Non-       isolate
                                      isolated        d                isolated                  d                      isolated         r
        Base                             030       0 175                 030                  0 177                      0205         0321
         Top                            1.461      0.177                1.609                 0.179                      0.577        0.848
      RV support                       0.583       0.173                0.676                 0.175                      0.362        0.558


     The time history responses for x-direction displacement are presented m Fig 11 and the response
spectra at major locations represented m Fig 12


     LRB Displacement of Isolated Building
                                                                                                                                   /   V^Topof the Suiting

                                                                                                                   Non-isolation / A \ /R^cter Support




                                                                              I
                                                                                                           1                             10
                                                                                                                        Frequency (Hz)




Fig 11 Displacement Responses of Reactor Building                                      Fig 12 Comparison ofAcceration Reponse
                                                                                       Spectra of Reactor Bmldmg(ATH,X-dir 0 3g)


                                                                                                                                                             209
The maximum peak acceleration is reduced to 0 177g for isolated condition, while it is 1 46g for non-
isolated condition The maximum displacement becomes larger to 15 Ocm for the isolated condition
The maximum acceleration for the vertical earthquake of 0 208g ZPA is amplified to 0 848g for
isolated condition, while the maximum acceleration is amplified to 0 577g for non-isolated condition
This agrees with the general trend that the horizontal isolation of structure can amplify the vertical
responses[7]


Reactor internal structures and components
      To produce the seismic analysis model for the reactor internal structures, the lumped-mass
modeling technique is used From the 3-dimensional finite element model of KALIMER reactor
internal structures, the detail local stiffness analyses are performed to construct the lumped-mass
seismic analysis model The seismic analysis and evaluation of KALIMER are presented through the
modal analysis, the seismic time history anahsis, and the equivalent seismic stress analysis Table 3
sho\\s the natural frequencies of the reactor structures resulted from the modal analysis for the seismic
analysis model shown in Fig 13



                            Table 3 Results of Modal Analyses of KALIMER
                            Horizontal (Hz)                       Vertical (Hz)
       Mode     Isolation           Non-isolation          Isolation          Non-isolation

         1           070                 8 11                 1 87                 1 87
         2          11 51               11 88                 809                  825
         3          13 69               1881                 1777                 1794
         4          21 04               2785                 23 08                3426
         5          2790                2797                 3485                 3659
         6          31 29               33 13                3660                 3671
         7          35 54               3695                 3701                 37 15
         8          38 19               3977                 62 10                78 16
         9          3978                5300                 8614                 91 53
         10         5329                5807                 9524                 9822




      The seismic responses of reactor structures of seismically isolated KALIMER are significantly
reduced for accelerations and relative displacements in horizontal direction For the isolation case, the
maximum peak acceleration in horizontal direction is same in all structures and components, i e ,
0 llg for OBE and 0 22g for SSE The responses are reduced about 14 times in IHX, 9 times in EMP
and 8 times in reactor vessel liner, support barrel, and core compared with those in non-isolated case
However, for the vertical direction, significant response amplifications occur in whole structures This
is due to the vertical structural frequency of 8 1 Hz located in dominant excitation frequency band of
input motion



210
                         Fig. 13. Seismic Analysis Model of Reactor Structures



     Table 4 shows the results of the seismic margin evaluations and the seismic capacity of
KALIMER reactor internal structures including the reactor vessel and containment vessel. From the
results, the containment vessel, reactor vessel, inlet plenum, and core support have large seismic stress
margins but the reactor vessel liner, support barrel, separation plate, and baffle plate have small
margins. The maximum stress occurs in reactor vessel liner parts connected with the separation plate
due to the vertical seismic loads.


          Table 4. Accerations & Displacements of Reactor Building Under ATH Earthquake
                                CJSSE * (MPa)   PLV (MPa)        Margins*              Minimum
          Items                                                                    Seismic Capacity*


 Containment Vessel                  21.4         401.9             17.78
   Reactor Vessel                    39.6         401.9             9.15
      RV Liner                      340.0         401.9             0.18                0.354g
   Support Barrel                   113.0         382.4             2.38
    Inlet Plenum                     20.8         401.9             18.32
  Separation Plate                  188.0         401.9             LU
     Baffle Plate                   193.0         382.4             0.98
   Core Supports                     72.1         401.9             4.57
D D0SSE     = Total stress intensity for horizontal and vertical SSE loads
* PL+b    = 1.5 x Min [ 2.4 Sm , 0.7 Su ], ASME Code Sec.III App.F.
* Margin = (PL+b / aSSE ) - 1
* Seismic Capacity = MinfSeismic Margin +1] x SSE


     To evaluate the maximum seismic resistance in preliminary designed KALIMER reactor internal
structures, the index of seismic capability(SC) is defined in this paper as follows:



                                                                                                       211
SC = Minimum [seismic stress margins +1] x SSE
      Using above equation, the seismic capability of KALIMER is preliminary calculated as 0.354g.
When the vertical stiffness of the support barrel/separation plate/reactor vessel liner region increases
by the design change, this index value is expected to be significantly increased[8],


Core Seismic Response
      The seismic analysis of LMR core structures is a complex problem involving the dynamic
interaction of many hundreds of individual fuel, blanket, and shield assemblies in a sodium
environment. To simplify the core seismic problem, the cluster modeling technique shown in Fig. 14
for a diametral row of the core is used. The clusters of assemblies are assumed to have no relative
motion between the assemblies within a cluster. The diametral row modeling approach gives
conservative results and it is easier to evaluate the core seismic behavior compared to a full core
model using the cluster technique.


      In the present analyses, 3-clusters row model, in which cluster B represents fuel assemblies and
clusters A and C represent the shield, blanket, reflector, and etc. as shown in Fig. 14, is used to
simplify the core seismic problem. The clusters A and C have 26 assemblies in each and cluster B has
51 assemblies. Fig. 15 shows the core seismic model used in analysis.




      Fig. 14. Clustering of LMR Core Assemblies     Fig. 15. Simplified Core Seismic Analysis Model


   To investigate the dynamic characteristics of LMR core seismic analysis model shown in Fig. 15, the
 modal analysis is carried out. To generate the linear model used in modal analysis, all the gap
  stiffness shown in Fig.4 are eliminated.    The results of modal analysis show that the fundamental
  frequency of LMR core is 4.3 Hz and the second natural frequency is 24.3Hz. These natural
  frequencies of core will show non-linear behavior during impacts at load pads.
       For the general investigation of core seismic responses, the harmonic excitations subjected to
rigid core shroud and core support plate are used in the analyses considering conservative excitation
conditions. Table 1 shows the input loading conditions.



212
                   Table 5 Results of Modal Analyses of KALIMER
                               Core Support Excitation for SSE Conditions (0.3g)
          Load Case          Ace.                   Freq.                                         Remarks
               1             1.28g                  8.1 Hz                                    Non-Iso; RI Freq.
               2             1 28g                  4.3 Hz                                    Non-Iso.Core Freq
               3             0 22g                  4.3 Hz                                     Iso., Core Freq.
               4             0.22g                  0.7 Hz                                     Isolation Freq.


     The results of the core seismic response analyses              show that . the load case 4, which is the
case of a seismically isolated LMR, gives significantly             reduced seismic responses compared with
those of the load cases 1 and 2. which are for the cases of non-isolated LMR. The seismic responses
for the load case 3 , which may give the limit design case of the seismic isolation frequency for core,
show little reduction in seismic responses(Fig.!6). When the seismic isolation frequency(0.7Hz) is
much lower than the core fundamental frequency(4.3Hz), a good isolation performance is observed in
terms of core seismic responses. Fig. 17 illustrates the impact load at the gap 3(TLP).

                                                                            !                                    Load Cax* 1          I
                                                          t:
                                                          "- 1 e * 5
                                                          1

                                                               Oe*0
                                                                            0             5            10           1.5           2
                                                                            '.                                   Load Caai 2          '.
                                                          ?
                                                               le       5
                                                          t         *

                                                          E
                                                               OttO         :|Li, uii^,LL,lI . tl V d.liiJlJ
                                                                            0             5            10           15            2
                                                               2«.S°
                                                                                                                 L»«d C a * « 3
                                                          g



                                                          E
                                                               OttO
                                                                                 :   I, .Jll.L Li      ,L . nli.llL|l., Jli,y,.i
                                                                            0             5            1.0          1.5           2
                                                                                                                  LoadCac«4
                                                          ?
                                                          i    1e*5

                                                          E
                                                               OttO
                                                                        0 0               5            10           15            2

                                                                                                   T i m e (s)




     Fig. 16 .Relative displacement at node 22(TLP)            Fig. 17. Impact Loads at Gap3 (TLP)


     From these results, we can conclude that the seismic isolation provides great reductions of the
impact loads as well as the number of contacts at the load pads of core assemblies at the former ring.
This can allow the simple design of a core control system. And it is expected that the requirements of
the core compaction and reactivity insertion problem can be easily satisfied when an efficient seismic
isolation is adapted for the LMR design[9].


3.3 Sodium Technology Development


Sodium Water Reaction Analysis
     Large scale water leakage into the sodium side due to the failure of tubes in LMR steam
generators leads to an increase in the pressure and temperature by hydrogen and the heat of reaction,


                                                                                                                                           213
and may give significant effects on ihe structural integrity of the intermediate heat transport
system(EHTS). Prior to designing IHTS and steam generator, a pre-estimate of the pressure effects for
this system should be conducted As a general trend of pressure change, when water leakage occurs, a
relatively high pressure is formed within milliseconds and is called the initial spike pressure After this
peak pressure, a lower secondary pressure follows and decreases slowly because         pressure change is
not sensitive to time. This step is called the quasi-steady state. The intensity of the initial spike
pressure depends on the internal structure of the steam generator and the transient characteristics of the
sonic waves. The intensity of the pressure depends on the inertia constraints of the IHTS


      A computer code. SPIKE, has been developed for          analyzing the various characteristics of
EHTS resulting from initial spike pressure. Briefly, the sodium flow in the IHTS is assumed to be a
compressible, one dimensional, unsteady viscous flow. From these assumptions and equations of
continuity, momentum and energy, the governing equations were developed.


      A comparison of the calculated results using the SPIKE code with the experimental value is
shown in Fig. 18. for an experimental EHX model of a 1/12.5 scale. The figure shows that the
calculated results are consistent with the experimental values in the IHX inlet[10]. The code will be
further verified by simulation experiments at KAERI's test facility, which is scaled down from
KALIMER in the ratio of 1/256 (the heat load scale-down ratio, about 1/6 of the linear scale-down
ratio). The SG-model has a diameter of 420mm (O.D.) and length of 2750mm with 5 layer helical coil
tubes of which the total length is about 280m and the material is stainless steel 304 without welding.
To assure the safety from accidents caused by large water leakages in KALIMER steam generators,
studies on leak propagation, their simulation, and a pressure change estimation       by computer codes
have been carried out The computer codes, HOPRE and DIPRE , are being developed to analyze the
quasi-steady-state pressure.




                       050




                       ooo




                                Fig. 18. Comparison of pressure changes



214
     The SPIKE code has been applied to investigate the pressure transients at various points of the
IHTS of KALIMER. As shown in Figure 2. KALIMER is of two IHTS loops, each loop consisting of
a steam generator, two intermediate heat exchangers, a pump and pipes which are connected with
several fittings. The IHTS of KALIMER was modeled              as a network having     40 branches and 39
junctions   for the analyses. The results show that pressure transients or peak pressures are rather
sensitive to such design parameters as leak rate, distance between the lower plenum of steam generator
and rupture disc, and        distance between steam generator and MX. Figure 19 shows the pressure
transients at various points of the IHTS with the rupture disk intact. It is noted that pressures tend to be
monotonically increasing but heavily oscillating at some points. It was also observed that pressure
transient behavior was quite sensitive to the size of sodium expansion tankfl 1].




                        Q.
                        5



                         £
                        a.




                                                      10

                                                  Time (sec)




                                      Fig. 19.IHTS pressure transients


Sodium Thermal hydraulics and Component Development Testings
     Small-scale sodium experiments have been performed to investigate the coolant thermal-
hydraulic behavior, such as turbulent mixing in compact reactor space, flow reversal by natural
circulation with
an electromagnetic pump operation, and decay heat removal by wall cooling, among others. Sodium
experiments continue to be performed to develop the technologies to measure such parameters as
differential pressure, local flow rate, and void fraction.


     In addition to the safety evaluation analyses of the IHTS for large leaks, R&D work on sodium
water reaction carried out to date includes small water leak experiments for the determination of a
design base leak rate, development of reliable and real time detection system of water leaks
using the acoustic signal as well as hydrogen detection, among others. Sodium fire characteristics and




                                                                                                        215
phenomena are also being investigated with 48m3 of rectangular type fire cell Analyses of various
types of sodium fire phenomena, development of sodium leak detection system, and fire
extinguishment, prevention and mitigation, aerosol filter and scrubbing devices will be earned out
In the area of key component development, the submersible-m-pool type electromagnetic pump of
operating temperature of 600° C and      200 I/mm maximum flow rate were developed using the theory
of magneto-hydraulics and the equivalent circuit analysis and its prototype was manufactured and its
operation tests were performed The SASS and FVTM were developed and their mockups are
manufactured and their theoretical validation tests were performed


6. Conclusion


      An effort has been made to establish by early 2000 the conceptual design of KALIMER with
system configuration, arrangement and key features satisfying design requirements Emphasis is
currently placed upon coming up with the design features meeting a set of the major safety design
requirements for accident prevention, which include those for inherent and passive characteristics of
negative reactivity insertion and decay heat removal, high shutdown reliability, high seismic margin,
and prevention of sodium chemical reaction, among others


      For the analysis of the KALIMER's inherent safety, a plant-wide transient analysis code SSC-K
is being developed Models for reactivity feedback effects and pool thermal-hydraulics have been
developed into the code and a preliminary analysis of UTOP and ULOF/LOHS performance has been
attempted The results show that net reactivity stays negative during the transient s analyzed   Design
alternatives have been investigated to improve decay heat removal capability by passive means, for
which functional testings are to be done Seismic base isolation is shown to reduce seismic response of
building and structures significantly and, therefore, provides a great advantage in safety for the
structural design of nuclear power plants Engineering and design analyses are also being made to
improve the EHTS configuration against sodium chemical reaction An investment is also being made
on the other key design features testing, such as electromagnetic pump, self-actuated shutdown system,
and fuelling machine in reactor vessel


      Substantial progress has been made in developing and validating the methodologies, and
engineering analyses for the conceptual design of KALIMER However, we still have a long way to go
down the road to accomplish the mandate, that is, to complete the basic design of KALIMER as well
as supporting R&D work


Acknowledgements
      This work was performed under the 'Long-term Nuclear R&D Program' sponsored by the
Ministry of Science and Technology of the Republic of Korea




216
                                        REFERENCES

[I]   C K Park, " Development of Korea Advanced LMR," pp 155, IAEA-TC-385 68. 3T Annual
      Mtg Of IWGFR, Vienna, Austna, 12-14 May 1998
[2]   C K Park et al, " KALIMER Design Concept Report " KAERI/TR-888/97. KAERI (1997)
[3]   S J Kim et al, " Conceptual Core Design for Uranium Metallic Fueled LMR," Proceeding of '98
      KNS Spring Conference. Vol 1, 64-69, Korean Nuclear Society (1998)
[4]   D H Hahn et al, " Preliminary Analysis of KALIMER Unprotected Transient Events,"
      Proceeding of '98 KNS Fall Meeting, Korean Nuclear Society (1998)
[5] YS Sun et al, "Analysis on Decay Heat Removal Characteristics of PSDRS," Proceedings of
      KNS Spnng Conference. Vol 2, 653-659 (1998)
[6]   Yoo, B , Lee. J H and Choi, I K , " Seismic analysis modeling and seismic response analysis of
      KALIMER reactor building, " KAERLTR-1062/98, (1998)
[7]   Yoo, B , Lee, J H and Koo, G H, "Study of reduced-scale model test results of high damping
      laminated rubber bearing for liquid metal reactor," KAERI/TR-539/95, (1995)
[8] Yoo, B , Lee, J H and Koo, G H, "Conceptual design by analysis of KALIMER seismic
      isolation," KAERI/TR-697/96, (1998)
[9]   Koo, G H, Lee, J H and Yoo, B , "Core Seismic Analysis for s Seismically Isolated LMR,"
      ASME. PVP-Vol 379,221-227(1998)
[10] YD Choi, S T Hwang, C K Park, " KALIMER Program and Sodium Technology in Korea,"
      Proceedings of IWGFR Technical Meeting on Sodium Removal and Disposal, (1997)
[II] YS Kim et al, " Evaluation of the Pressure Wave in the KALIMER HiTS ." '98 KNS Fall
      meeting, (1998)




                                                                                                217
                                                                                           XA0056260
       SEVERAL ACCIDENTS ABOUT ERHRS OF CEFR

       D. ZHANG
       China Institute of Atomic Energy,
       Beijing, China

      Abstract
       An analysis about several unusual acpidents about Emergency Residual Heat Removal System
(ERHRS) of China Experiment Fast Reactor (CEFR) is present. CEFR is a pool-type sodium-cooled
fast reactor. The ERHRS of this reactor is designed in passive principle, which enhance the interior
reliability of CEFR. It is consist of two sets of independent channels. Each channel is comprised of
decay heat exchanger (DHX), intermediate circuit, sodium-air heat exchanger (AHX) and related
auxiliary system. Both DHX are located in the hot pool of the main vessel directly, which is used to
cool the hot sodium. The whole set of ERHRS is completely passive except the ventilation valves of
AHX.    But, as a very important set of engineered safety features which is the final way to remove the
heat from the reactor core, it is necessary to pay attention to all of possibilities that may reduce this
ability. Several accidents are analyzed include the ventilation valves couldn't be opened, only one set
of ERHRS could work and so on. The calculation results show that the ERHRS can keep the reactor in
a safety status. Even though it is, experiments are necessary in the view of engineering yet.

1. Introduction

      ERHRS of CEFR is consisted of two independent sets of channels and each channel can remove
0.525MW heat from the reactor core. The whole system is a passive system except the ventilation
valves of sodium-air heat exchanger. Each channel of the ERHRS is mainly include
      • An sodium-sodium decay heat exchanger (DHX),
      • An sodium-air heat exchanger (AHX),
      • Intermediate circuit and chimney,
      • Auxiliary systems include impurity inspecting system, heating system, temperature
           detecting system, sodium fire prevention system, etc.

      The design of ERHRS must be ensure that the temperature of main vessel and metal structure in
the vessel couldn't exceed 560 centigrade degree in order to keep their strength. At the same time,
these means have been adopt to enhance the stability and reliability.
      • The ventilation valve of AHX consist of three inlet air doors and one outlet air door that
           could be driven either by electric motor or by manual,
      • Emergency power supply,
      • Two valves locate in the line to auxiliary system,
      •    All intermediate circuit pipe is covered with guard tube,
      • Physical separation is designed for two channels.

       Figure-1 gives us the profile of ERHRS. In the following cases, it is possible for main heat
transfer system losing its function:
       • Loss of off-site power supply;
       • Loss of main feed water;
       • Earthquake.

                                                                                                     219
                                   FIG. 1 Principle Diagram ofERHRS


       When the main heat transfer system can not work normally, the ERHRS will automatically put
into operation in ten minutes to remove reactor residual heat to ultimate heat sink (atmosphere).

2. Several Typical Accidents

       For ERHRS of CEFR, there are some conditions that may cause the system loss partial or whole
ability to removal residual heat. These occurrences are, 1) the natural convection is broken because
pipe losing its integrality or losing partial or all coolant; 2) the pipes is blocked because of sodium's
frozen; 3) the ventilation valves couldn't be opened. For the first case, the design has considered
earthquake and all of the pipes are equipped with guard-tube that makes this type accident meet a very
low probability. For the second case, there are few sodium-temperature detecting points and electric-
heaters that prevent those accidents occurring, and, it is possible to adjust the ventilation-valve to
decrease heat losing which could reduce the probability at the same time. For the last case, the failure
probability is lager than the forth two cases because the ventilation valves need power to drive though

220
it is divided into several sections and every section is consist of multi-vanes. Although it is, this
condition must be analyzed in the base of safety considering and safety-guide requiring. We are either
interesting in the condition that only one loop could work and other unusual occurrences except those
mentioned above.

2.1 Both ventilation valves could not be opened

       CEFR is pool-type reactor and the main vessel is divided into two parts. The upper part is called
hot pool because it contains hot sodium whose temperature is 516 centigrade degree. The lower part is
called cool pool because it contains cool sodium whose temperature is 360 centigrade degree. This
accident is a BDBA (Beyond Design Basis Accident) in the Primary Safe Analysis Report of CEFR.
Here are initial conditions,
       • The reactor operated under full power (65MW),
       • ERHRS is standing by.

      In order to calculate within a long period, this accident must be analyzed in detail in the first
hundreds second. 3D method is used for taking into consideration the complex rapid flow changing.
Figure- 4 shows, us the sodium temperature field and flow scheme in the main vessel at 1 second, 81
second and 618 second respectively. These figures show that the cool sodium from could cool reactor
core and partial residual heat is stored in the sodium.

       The curves of sodium temperature in the core and mass flow of primary loop are given in
Figure-2 and Figure-3 respectively. At the beginning of this accident, the coolant-temperature falls
first because of the primary pumps' coast-down more slowly than the reactor power's decreasing.
After that, the coolant temperature increase in the reason of flow lower than residual-heat and natural
convection begins to establish. Figure 3 shows that the coolant flow changes very slowly after 100

              600.00 —r




              400.00

                       0.00   100.00        200.00    300.00    400.00   500.00    600.00
                                                     Time (s)
                                       Channel 1
                                       Channel 2
                                       Channel 3
                                       Channel 4




                                   FIG. 2      Core Outlet Temperature

                                                                                                    221
                  1 00 —r- -




             cr   010 — - - -

             I




                  001

                        000     10000     20000      30000      40000      50000      60000
                                                    Time (s)



                                    FIG. 3 Primary Sodium Flow



second, which means the natural convection has established basically. During this period, we should
pay attention to the clad temperature because the maximum value will appear in this period.
Fortunately, the maximum temperature is 563 centigrade degree, which is lower than the permitting
line (850 centigrade degree).

       ID method is adept to analyze the quasi-steady state. Figures 5 to 8 have given the calculation
results on a long period. It can be seen that the sodium temperature outlet from the reactor core reach
to 547 centigrade degree at 19.13 hour. On the other hand, the sodium temperature, bounded with main
vessel, continue decrease for the reason of heat loss through steel vessel wall. And the temperature of
wall approximately equal to this temperature. It can be summarized that the reactor structure
temperature is lower than the permit value of 560 centigrade degree. The heat removed by ERHRS
changes slightly after the accident occurring. Otherwise, it is better to pay attention to the heat losing
through secondary loop, which makes a great contribution to the mass flow rate of primary loop. In
another way, it can decrease the maximum temperature at the exit of core.

2.2 One loop failure absolutely

      It's necessary to analyze this accident in the view of studying the reliability of ERHRS except
the accident mentioned above. Figure 9 to 12 give us the calculation results. It can be seen that the
sodium temperature in the hot pool is lower than the first accident. The reason is thai AHXpower jumps
from 10% to 100% very soon after the ventilation valves being opened. Another more severe case is
calculated too which the air door could not be opened at the same time. The results are good either if
the vanes could be destroyed after 40 minutes.

2.3 Ventilation valves opened abnormally

      The nominal power of CEFR is 65.MW and the sodium mass flow rate through the reactor core
is 300kg/s. If the ERHRS is put into using unexpected, heat losing through ERHRS is only 1.62


222
percent of full power. The difference of sodium temperature at the entrance of IHX (Intermediate Heat
Exchanger) is less than 3 centigrade degrees. On the other hand, it will spend 3 minutes at least to
decrease 1 centigrade degree of the hot pool sodium temperature. Time is enough to terminate this
accident with various means.




                                                                                          L




                                                                                         U
                                                                                        0.06 m/s


                                                                                       Time =01 Sec




                                                                                         u
                                                                                        0.0&TV3




                                                                                      Tim. = 618 Sue




             FIG. 4   Temperature and Flow Field of Primary Sodium in Reactor Vessel

                                                                                                       223
         56000




         44000

                 000      2000                4000                  6000        8000   10000
                                                      Time (hour)

                                   Sodium temperature (at outlet of the core)
                                   Sodium temperature (bounding the mam vessel)
                                   Sodium temperature (upper plenum)




                       FIG 5 Sodium Temperature in Hot-Pool




         1 0000 -=




         01000 — ;




      a; 00100
      2°
      &
         00010




         00001

                 000       2000                40 00                60 00       8000   10000
                                                      Time (hour)
                           (•—   Total Residul Heat
                           ^—    Heat Loss through Vessel
                           3—    Heat Loss through Secondary Loop
                           it—   Heat Loss through RHRS




                            FIG. 6 Heat Removal Portions


224
     540.00




     46000

              000            2000               40 00             60 00       8000   10000
                                                      Time (hour)
                      •—     Sodium Temperature at the Exit of AHX
                      •—     Sodium Temperature at the Entrance of AHX
                      |—     Air Temperature at the Exit of AHX


                       FIG. 7 Temperature Variation of AHX




      060




      040




JS
0)
OL
       020


              JDD D

       0.00

              0.00           2000               40 00                60 00    8000   100.00
                                                        Time (hour)

                     •«t*—    Sodium Mass Flow Rate of Intermediate Circuit
                     •^—      Air Mass Flow Rate
                     •Q—      Power of One AHX


                      FIG. 8 Flow and Power Variation of AHX


                                                                                              225
            600 00 —r




            560 00 — - -

      P


      "a    520 00



      I

            48000




            44000

                      000            1000                     2000                   3000   4000
                                                           Time (hour)

                                        Sodium temperature (at outlet of the core)
                                        Sodium temperature (bounding the mam vessel)
                                        Sodium temperature (upper plenum)


                            FIG. 9 Sodium Temperature in Reactor Vessel




             1 0000




             0 1000




             00100
       JS
       8.
             00010




             00001

                      000             1000                       2000                3000   4000
                                                            Time (hour)
                                      Total Residul Heat
                                      Heat Loss through Vessel
                                      Heat Loss through Secondary Loop
                                      Heat Loss through RHRS




                                  FIG. 10 Heat Removal Portions


226
       60000




       40000 — -
£
 3
"ro
0)
o.
0)
       20000




                                    i i i I in——I—I I I I in——I—I I I I in       I—i—n
                 000     001                010                 100
                                                  Time (hour)
                        Sodium Temperature at the Exit of AHX
                        Sodium Temperature at the Entrance of AHX
                        Air Temperature at the Exit of AHX




                        FIG. 11 Temperature Variation of AHX




           1 20 —r




           080




       s
      0)
      OL
           040




           000

                  000     001                010                 1 00     1000           10000
                                                   Time (hour)
                          Sodium Mass Flow Rate of Intermediate Circuit
                          Air Mass Flow Rate
                          Power of One AHX



                        FIG. 12 Flow and Power Variation of AHX

                                                                                                 227
3. Conclusion

     As mentioned above, the ERHRS is designed to ensure safety and reliability, therefore, few
measures are considered in design. They are:
    (1) Inlet air door of AHX is divided into three sections,
    (2) Ventilation valves could be driven by normal power supply, emergency power supply or
         manual operation,
    (3) All intermediate circuit pipes are covered by guard tube,
    (4) Physical separation is designed for two subsystems.

     Calculations show that in all considered ERHRS accidents, including BDBA, primary sodium
temperature is always within safety range.




228
      LIQUID METAL FAST REACTOR TRANSIENT DESIGN                                 XA0056261

      C. HORAK, E. PURVIS III
      Energy and Nuclear Technology Division,
      Brookhaven National Laboratory,
      Upton, New York, United States of America




      Abstract

       An examination has been made of how the currently available computing capabilities
could be used to reduce Liquid Metal Fast Reactor design, manufacturing, and construction
cost. While the examination focused on computer analyses some other promising means to
reduce costs were also examined.

   Introduction

        A major problem with commercialization of Liquid Metal Cooled Fast Reactors has
been high design and manufacturing costs. Operation with coolant and metal structures
temperatures in the creep range, coupled with sodium's high thermal conductivity necessitate
use of codes, standards, requirements, and design approaches that have been very costly.

        While it has been accurately stated that the cost of high temperature design on FFTF
and Clinch River was small compared to the cost of the components, this design cost was still
very high by any measure. Liquid metal reactor components and systems designers must
perform extensive strain limited structural analyses, address considerations associated with
phenomena such as creep fatigue interactions, and provide for the design to accommodate
relatively large movements and flexibility. An additional expense was associated with the
effort related to code interpretations and code cases. Considerable effort was involved in the
use of simplified methods (screening procedures) to pinpoint problem areas and minimize the
more elaborate analyses of critical structural configurations required to show code
compliance. This made it possible to resolve design and analysis problems, but restricted
choices system and component design.

       Much larger costs than the obvious costs directly associated with high temperature
design were associated with the impact of this required methodology on the resulting designs
and design requirements for systems and components.


                         Design transients and operating transients

        The duty cycle (design) transients are events selected, by the designer, as
representative of operating conditions that have been determined may occur during plant
operation and that are sufficiently severe or frequent to be of possible significance to
component behavior. These events are classified as normal events, upset events, emergency
events, and faulted events. Attachment 1 provides a definition of these categories of events
and a short discussion of the severity of damage and significance of the event categories.

                                                                                          229
        These transients are not normally expected to represent actual plant operations, but are
meant to be used for predictions of systems response to the events and for component stress
analyses. The systems analyses include thermal/hydraulic analyses of the coolant, neutronic
analyses of core behavior, coupled thermal/hydraulic-neutronic analyses to allow
consideration of the effects of interactions, and analyses using coolant temperatures to predict
metal temperatures, temperature rates of change and the like. In addition, it was necessary to
build scale models on do testing (e.g., hydraulic, mixing, vibration) to obtain information for
both direct use and for use in dimemsionless analyses. Simplified analyses were used to
idealize complex geometries, loading histories, and material models. These screening
analyses were used mainly to identify highly stressed and critical areas to guide design
choices.

       Attachment 2 provides a listing of the design transients for the Clinch River Breeder
Reactor Plant. These events and frequencies provided are from Revision 118, the last
Revision before the project was terminated. These design transient events and frequencies
were used to order essentially all of the components for Clinch River. Most of the design
work was completed. All major components were either delivered or well into
manufacturing. The plant had essentially completed the licensing process, with all major
issues having been resolved. Revision 118 is a mature listing of transients that had been
used in the real world to design a loop type LMFR.

        These demonstrably conservative transients were then grouped into umbrella
transients and applied to various components and locations in components. This grouping of
transients resulted in the frequencies of some relatively minor transients being summed with
the most severe transient in the group. Thus the selected umbrella design transients are
normally very conservative both as to severity and number.

        The actual operational transients experienced should be considerably less severe than
the design transients and have a significantly lower frequency of occurrence. The use of the
actual operating transient history, the loading conditions accompanying these events, and the
frequency can be used to reevaluate to design, for purposes such as life extension. These
analyses should demonstrate that the achievable operating life of the plant is much greater
than the originally specified design life.

                                        Past practices

        Experience showed that minor differences of opinion on analysis procedures
concerning the ASME Code and code cases exaggerated difficulties and had considerable
impact on increasing cost and restricting design options. The restrictions resulted from the
inability to perform the large number of complex analyses required for many options due to
costs, lack of adequate computing power, and related factors. The result was the need to
select approaches that avoided, or minimized, uncertainties and to rely on the simplified,
screening analyses, with the attendant restrictions in design options.

       Differences in design practices have in the past handicapped developments that could
have reduced costs. For example, some difficulties with past design practices are evident in
examining application of the ASME Code and Code Case N-47 to pool type LMFRs, such as
Super Phenix. The design of Super Phenix resulted in considerably thinner components.
This required different buckling rules. Super Phenix design creep effects were negligible


230
during normal operation, requiring different treatment from loop type reactors during
transients into the creep range, such as resulted during emergency and faulted conditions.
Because of these and other such problems the French developed a set of LMFR rules to
address shortcomings of the ASME Code and apply available design and construction
experience.

        Needs to address problem areas in high temperature structural analyses were studied
by the Working Group, Codes and Standards (WGCS) of the Commission of the European
Communities in 1979. The WGCS examined and promoted efforts on benchmark
calculations, constitutive equations, fracture mechanics, and seismic analyses.

         Work to resolve these and other questions has been substantially reduced in recent
years. Very few of these problems that rely on obtaining long term materials data have
progressed. Some work on alternate materials to austenitic stainless steels has produced
results.

                                  Approach and limitations

        An examination was made of the work that was done for Clinch River design using
these transients. FFTF design work on reactor components was also considered. This effort
focused on consideration of what would be done different at the present using currently
available computer technology. The evaluation was qualitative, since there was no reasonable
way to determine exact savings in design, analysis, and manufacturing costs.

        There was one key technology, other than computer technology considered. This was
the possible use of 9 Cr - 1 Mo, a ferritic/martensitic alloy. 9 Cr - 1 Mo promises to be an
excellent substitute for austenitic stainless steels and 2-1/4 Cr 1 Mo steel. This material could
be used in the entire system, thus eliminating dissimilar metal transition joints. It offers
resistance to irradiation induced metal swelling and creep, helium embrittlement, and would
allow higher design margins for ratchetting and creep-fatigue in steam generator applications.

        In the past considerable effort has been devoted to finding and using "short cuts" to
avoid the necessity of what were considered to be impracticably complex analyses.

        The steps in the design process were examined. Areas where currently available
computing power and analytic capabilities offered promise for cost reductions were
identified. The potential reductions in manufacturing costs by increases in design flexibility
were identified. Areas where no potential improvements could be identified at this time
where identified.

                         Design areas and potential cost reductions

        Systems design requires the interaction of a number of different disciplines with
different interests. Examples are instrumentation and control, component design, licensing,
and operation people. Design transient events must be realistic from the stand point of the
instrumentation and control systems. They must be achievable by the component designers.
They must be acceptable to the nuclear regulatory authority. And last, but not least they must
be acceptable to the operations people. For this reason the operations people were involved
from the start. Preparation of operating procedures was done in parallel with design analyses.


                                                                                             231
        Due to the cost of the extensive analyses required, it has been the practice of designers
to "lump" transients together as "umbrella" transients. Thus, instead of having a duty cycle
requiring thousands of analyses of events that may occur only once or at most a few times,
there is a duty cycle with a small number of events. The price paid is that the resulting
"demonstratively conservative duty cycle results in the need for extremely expensive design
solutions.

        This duty cycle creates challenges that have been met by designers of liquid metal
reactors that operate at high temperatures, such as the Fast Flux Test Facility and the Clinch
River Breeder Reactor Plant. However, this was done at great cost for the analyses,
extremely high manufacturing costs, and has created a disconnect between design transients
and the real world.

        Examination of the traditional design process, screening analyses, selection of the
duty cycle, umbrella transients, unresolved differences in national codes and standards,
inability to quantify the safety margins involved in use of codes and standards, and actions
that overlay conservative actions on conservative actions shows that this process, while
demonstrated to be highly effective, is also extremely expensive. The extreme conservatism
involved in this design process is not visible, with the result that the public cannot see or
understand the level of design conservatism and safety that results. Worst yet, many
designers also do not understand. This results in apparently conservative actions that may do
nothing to improve the design.

       A new design approach should be possible based upon current computing and
information technology. Such an approach could result in significant design simplifications
and reduce the cost of manufacturing and construction.

        It is now appears possible for designers of liquid metal fast reactors to achieve the
same results at considerably lower cost. The historical practice of "umbrella" transients and
the associated simplified duty cycle is no longer necessary. The current computing capability
of easily affordable PCs and work stations now makes it possible to analyze the many
transients that must be considered in the design and develop more economical structural and
systems design solutions. Future Liquid Metal Reactors can take advantage of computer
technology to significantly lower costs.

        To determine the systems response to transients it is necessary to prepare a model of
the entire reactor system. This can be done at several levels of complexity, with areas such as
the core or the steam generators being represented in considerable detail, or relatively simple.
 The transient model can readily be a simulator. The use of "masks" to allow ease of
modeling has been demonstrated in Nuclear Plant Analyzers developed for various nuclear
power plants including VVERs in various countries. The use of the available spectrum of
modeling complexity allows the systems designer to work with the various specialized
disciplines to obtain a detailed understanding of the response of various systems to various
design options. Areas of special concern can then be modeled in greater detail, or more
detailed simulations run on the more promising design options.

        It should not be necessary to develop, early on, a restrictive duty cycle to be applied as
a design specification. The potential for ease of modeling can allow optimization of the
transients that would be characteristic of various design approaches. Specific structural
responses to these transients can be determined and changes made to mitigate problems.

232
       This would entail a much more elaborate effort in the conceptual design phase that
would reduce design uncertainties in the later phases.

        Rather than work to achieve a simplified duty cycle and simplified umbrella
transients, more exacting and realistic analyses could be performed. The currently available
computing power allows these multiple analyses to be performed, facilitating optimization
and removing the necessity for very conservative approaches to be taken to minimize and
simplify calculations and analyses. At the same time the actual safety margins can be much
better understood and more transparent, thus resolving one of the past difficulties between US
and European design requirements.

         By building on past operating and modeling experience it should be possible to use
computer modeling and thus reduce the requirement for, or extent of, model or component
testing.

        The use of advanced computer modeling should allow reduced costs of fabrication,
inspection and surveillance. In the longer term, it should be possible to develop uniform
international code approaches for LMFR design that are less restrictive and allow
improvements in plant availability and reliability.

        There are some areas where it may not be currently practical to realize improvements
using computer technology. There remains a need for improved materials data. However, it
is possible that considerations of current computer analysis capabilities might result in
changes in requirements for material properties information. For example, in some locations
thermal striping causes a very large number of repetitive thermal transients on the metal
surface being washed by sodium of fluctuating temperatures. It has been necessary to design
for an infinite number of cycles. This requires the use of materials such as inconel, with
associated high material and manufacturing cost.

       An area where savings may be possible with improved materials data is on evaluation
of welded joints. The material properties of the complete weld joint, as opposed to the weld
metal alone, are needed. Ductility under multiaxial loading plays a key role in the structural
adequacy of weldments subject to cyclic loading.

        The US Liquid Metal Fast Reactor program compiled Nuclear Systems Materials
Handbook. There is a vast amount of published information concerning structural design and
evaluation of nuclear power plant components and high temperature structural design. Of late
the quantity of such publication has greatly diminished. There is and will be, however,
significant information coming from activities such as the Phenix Life Extension Project,
from ongoing development activities, from applicable non nuclear work, and potentially from
other activities, such as at Dounreay.

        A related point is the need for an internationally available, and maintained, nuclear
materials data handbook. The existence of the vast amount of potentially usable information,
coupled with the extreme difficulty in searching for and locating this information is totally
incompatible with current information technology. For example, while it is easy to find much
information on many subjects on the Internet, it is virtually impossible to find any
information on topics related to high temperature structural design and materials data. This
data is published in had hoc reports, in a number of technical journals, and in various reports


                                                                                           233
that are not generally available. As people who know where the information is leave the field
these documents become increasingly hard to find and use. The result is that much valuable
information, obtained at great expense, is being lost. Action to correct this situation would be
of significant benefit.

        There has been, and continues to be, significant High Temperature Structural Design
technology developments for complex, critical non-nuclear structures that are subjected to
elevated temperatures during normal operation.- For example, such activities have been
conducted in many nations to support aerospace development programs, such as those related
to engines.

         Because these developments are focused on intended applications in other fields and
not problems of LMFR design there are significant differences in design lives, service
conditions, materials, manufacturing practices, etc. The types of structures differ. The
impact of these differences on such design information as constitutive models, material
failure modes and models, and structural failure modes and consequences are sometimes
difficult to assess. However, computer modeling, structural analyses methods, and analytic
methods to understand materials behavior have advanced greatly in some of these non nuclear
areas.

        It is obvious that application of these developments in non nuclear areas is not a trivial
undertaking. In spite of the obvious difficulties adapting these developments to LMFRs
offers considerable promise and should be aggressively pursued. The reductions in the
overall level of LMFR development activities, with the attendant reduction in work
specifically directed at LMFRs makes such effort doubly attractive.




234
Attachment 1                          Definitions of categories of events

Normal:        Normal operation includes steady power operations and those departures from
               steady operation which are expected frequently or regularly in the course of
               plant operations, refueling, maintenance, or maneuvering of the plant. These
               events are to cause no damage. No damage is defined as those that:
                       1) result in no significant loss of effective fuel life;
                      2) are accommodated within the fuel and plant operating margins
                      without requiring manual or automatic protective actions; and
                       3) result in no planned release of radioactivity.

Upset          Any abnormal incident not causing a forced outage or causing a forced outage
               for which corrective action does not include any repair or mechanical damage.
                These off-normal conditions can cause anticipated conditions which
               individually may be expected to occur once or more during the plant lifetime.
               These operational incidents are occurrences that:
                       1) result in.no reduction in effective fuel lifetime below the design
                      values;
                      2) can be accommodated with, at most, a reactor trip that assures the
                      plant will be capable of returning to operation after corrective action to
                      clear the trip cause; and/or
                      3)     Result in plant radioactivity releases that may approach the
                       10CFR20- guidelines.

Emergency      Infrequent incidents requiring shutdown for correction of the condition or
               repair of damage in the system. There is no loss of structural integrity. These
               include unlikely off-normal conditions which individually are not expected to
               occur during the plant lifetime. However, when integrated over all plant
               components, events in this category may be expected to occur a number of
               times. These may result in minor incidents, that is an occurrence which results
               in:
                       1) a general reduction in the fuel burnup capability, and at most, a
                       small fraction of fuel rod cladding failures:
                       2) sufficient plant of fuel rod damage that could preclude resumption
                       of operation for a considerable period of time; and/or
                       3) plant radioactive releases that may exceed 10CFR20 guidelines,
                       but does not result in interruption or restrictions of public use of areas
                       beyond the exclusion boundary.

Faulted        Postulated event and consequences where integrity and operabiliry may be
               impaired to the extent that considerations of public health and safety are
               involved. These are off-normal conditions of such extremely low probability
               that no events in this category are expected to occur during the plant lifetime,
               but which represent extreme or limiting cases of failures which are identified
               as design bases. These are major incidents which can result in:
                       1) substantial fuel and/or cladding melting or distortion in individual
                       fuel rods, but the configuration remains coolable;




                                                                                            235
      2) plant damage that may preclude resumption of plant operations, but
      that will not cause loss of safety function necessary to cope with the
      occurrence; and/or
      3) radioactivity release that may exceed the 10CFR 20 guidelines, but
      are well within the 10CFR100 guidelines.




236
Attachment 2               Clinch River Breeder Reactor Plant
                         Design Transient Events and Frequencies
                             (From Overall Plant Design Description,
                                    OPPD 10, Revision 118)

The Event is a short description of events to be considered in the plant structural design (see
Attachment 1).

The Frequencies are the maximum number of occurrences of each event expected during the
life of the plant. These frequencies are used as the basis for plant structural design.

A.     Normal Events and Frequencies

N-l    Dry system heat up and cool down, sodium fill and drain loop for an entire system
       5 total system + 8 per loop + an additional 17 per intermediate loop, exclusive of the
       Intermediate Heat Exchanger.

N-2a   Startup from refueling                                                140
N-2b   Startup from hot standby                                                     700

N-3a   Shutdown to refueling                                                 60
N-3b   Shutdown to hot standby                                                    210
N-4a   Loading and unloading                                                       9300
                                                                                   (each)
N-4b   Load fluctuations                                      46-500 (each, up and down)

N-5    Step load changes of+10% of full load                                         750 (each)

N-6    Steady state temperature fluctuations                                 30 x 106

N-7    Steady state flow induced vibrations                                  10'° (Sodium)

B.     Upset Events and Frequencies
       Note: The total frequency for U-l events is associated with normal decay heat so as
       to balance the trips associated with partial decay heat for events U-2 through U-23.

U-l a Reactor trip from full power with normal decay heat                            180
U- Ib Reactor trip from full power with minimum decay heat                                        0
U- Ic Reactor trip from partial power with minimum decay heat                                     0

U-2a   Uncontrolled rod insertion                                                          10
U-2b   Uncontrolled rod withdrawal from 100% power                                        10
U-2c   Uncontrolled rod withdrawal from startup with automatic trip                        /7
U-2d   Uncontrolled rod withdrawal from startup to trip point with delayed manual trip      3
U-2e   Plant loading at max. rod withdrawal rate                                          10
U-2f   Reactor startup with excessive step power change                                    50
       Note: These events are part of the startups specified for event N-2b and should not be
       added as separate startups.



                                                                                              237
U-3a Partial loss of primary pump                                                  2 per loop
U-3b Loss of power to one primary pump                                             5 per loop

U-4a   Partial loss of one intermediate pump                              2 per loop
U-4b   Loss of power to one intermediate pump                                     5 per loop

U-5a Loss of AC power to one feedwater pump motor                                        10
U-5b Loss of feedwater flow to all steam generators                                       5

U-6    (Deleted)

U-7a Primary pump speed increase                                                   5
U-7b Intermediate pump speed increase                                                     5

U-8    Primary pump pony motor failure                                             5 per pump

U-9    Intermediate pump pony motor failure                                        5 per pump

U-lOa Evaporator module inlet isolation valve closure                              4 per loop
U-1 Ob Superheater module inlet isolation valve closure                            2 per loop
U-lOc (Deleted)
U-lOd Superheater module outlet isolation valve closure                            2 per loop

U-l la Water side isolation and dump of both evaporators and the superheater       6per loop
U-l Ib Water side isolation and dump of evaporator module                          6 per loop
U-l 1 c Steam side isolation and dump of superheater                                3 per loop

U-l 2 Loss of feedwater flow to one steam generator loop                           3 per loop

U-l 3 Feedwater throttle valve failed open                                         6per loop

U-14 Loss of one recirculation pump                                                8 per loop

U-l 5a Turbine trip (without reactor trip)                                                50
U-15b Turbine trip with reactor trip (loss of main condenser or similar problem)          10

U-l 6 (Deleted)
U-l 7 (Deleted)
U-l 8 Loss of all offsite power                                                           16

U-l9 Plant shutdown in response to small sodium-steam/water leak indications 3 per loop
U-19a (Deleted)
U-19b (Deleted)
U-19c (Deleted)
U-20a Inadvertent opening of one turbine bypass valve                                J
U-20b Turbine bypass valve fails open following reactor trip                     5

U-21a Inadvertent opening of evaporator outlet safety power relief valves 5 per loop
U-21 b Inadvertent opening superheater outlet safety/ power relief valves         3 per loop


238
U-22   Inadvertent opening of SGAHRS steam drum vent valve                           3 per loop

U-23   Inadvertent opening of evaporator inlet dump valve                            3 per loop

U-24   Reactor trip with failure of one PACC to perform                                10
       Note: These events are part of the reactor trips for event U-la and should not be added
       as separate trips.

C.     Emergency Events

The frequencies for these events are that each component must accommodate 5 occurrences
of the most severe emergency transient for that component (one every 6 years) plus two
consecutive occurrences of the most severe event (or consecutive occurrences of 2 unlike
events if the unlike events provide a more severe effect than consecutive occurrences of the
most severe event). However, if event E-15 is the most severe condition for a component7 it
shall be evaluated for a frequency of 2 for that component in addition to the 7 occurrences of
the next most severe transient.

E-l    Primary pump mechanical failure

E-2    Intermediate pump mechanical failure

E-3a   (Deleted)
E-3b   (Deleted)
E-4a   (Deleted)
E-4b   (Deleted)
E-4c   (Deleted)
E-4d   (Deleted)

E-5    Loss of primary pump pony motor with failure of the check valve to shut

E-6    Design basis steam generator sodium/water reaction

E-7    One loop natural circulation heat rejection from initial two loop operation

E-8    Rupture disk failure in SGS sodium/water protection system

E-9a   Water/steam side isolation and dump of an evaporator/ superheater module with
       failure of a module outlet isolation valve to close
E-9b   Water/steam side isolation and dump of an evaporator/ superheater module with
       failure of an evaporator inlet isolation valve to close
E-9c   Water/steam side isolation and dump of an evaporator/ superheater module with
       failure of a superheater inlet isolation valve to close

E-10   Water side isolation of an evaporator module with failure of the water pump valve to
open

E-11   Steam side isolation of a superheater with failure of one relief valve to open



                                                                                             239
E-12   (Deleted)

E-13a (Deleted)
E-13b (Deleted)

E-14   Inadvertent dump of intermediate loop sodium

E-15   DHRS activation 24 hours after scram

E-16   Three loop natural circulation

E-17   Two loop natural circulation heat rejection from initial three loop operation

E-18   Two loop natural circulation

E-19   Loss of flow in two sodium loops

D. Faulted Events

F-l    (Deleted)

F-2    DHRS Activation without SGS cooldown

F-3 a Feedwater line rupture between steam drum and inlet isolation valve
F-3b Feedwater line rupture in main incoming header

F-4a Saturated steam line rupture
F-4b Main steam line rupture

F-4c   Rupture between superheater module outlet and superheater outlet isolation valve
F-4d   Rupture between superheater outlet isolation valve and main steam line

F-5a   Recirculation line break between drum and recirculation pump inlet
F-5b   Recirculation line break between evaporator outlet and drum inlet

F-6    Intermediate Loop Sodium-Air Leak




240
                                                                                   XA0056262
      A LIFETIME EXTENSION PROJECT FOR THE
      PHENIX REACTOR: ADDITIONAL KNOWLEDGE REGARDING
      THE IN-SERVICE BEHAVIOUR OF ITS MATERIALS AND STRUCTURES

      P. MARTIN
      CEA/DRN/DER/SERA,
      St. Paul-lez-Durances

      L. JERRIGE
      DCP/MSAQ, Central PHENIX,
      Marcoule

      T. FORGERON
      CEA/DEM/SRMA,
      Saclay

      J. DEVOS
      CEA/DMT/SEMT,
      Saclay

      France


     Abstract

      The PHENIX Life Extension Project groups together all the actions required to pursue
operation of the reactor, particularly with a view to performing irradiation experiments in the
framework of the back-end of the fuel cycle programs. As such, it comprises a series of
investigations whose objective is to assess the state of the reactor after about one hundred
thousand hours of operation.

      The following points have been particularly investigated :
      The materials behavior (austenitic, austeno-ferritic, and ferritic steels - base metal,
welds, heat affected zones) in terms of thermal aging and its effect on mechanical properties,
embrittlement, sensitiveness to corrosion (in normal and incidental environment), and
radiation effect on the potentially exposed structures.
      Furthermore, specific programs have been devoted to the assessment of thermo-
mechanical response of some particular components. This concerns some types of welds with
regard to fatigue or creep fatigue, some parts of large shells with regard to ratchetting and
buckling, and main secondary piping.
      An extensive program was dedicated to the recovery of the thermo-mechanical damage
undergone by the structures and its extrapolation to the future. This has led to consider in
details thermo-hydraulical effects such as fluctuations in streams and bedding zones.
      Some intergranular cracking of welded joints had to be closely examined ; this was
achieved by a research work that has produced important advancements in that field.
      With the aim of evaluating potential defects, real progresses have been made in the
knowledge of large defect's behavior in thin shells.

      The feedback of the examination and studies was also derived in terms of relevance of
manufacturing, exploitation and monitoring conditions. It is believed that this experience will
be useful for future design rules.

                                                                                            241
1.     INTRODUCTION

      Built at the beginning of the 1970s and linked up to the network on December 13,1973,
the fast reactor (FR), PHENDC, has now accumulated almost one hundred thousand hours of
operation. Its regular operation until 1990 enabled researchers to validate the concept, acquire
considerable experience in the field of operation and did much to improve fuel performance.
Incidents occurring during operation concerned the intermediate heat exchangers, and later the
steam generators. They were understood and quickly brought under control.

      At the end of the 1980s, automatic shutdown problems involving negative reactivity
surges began to appear along with the first signs of major component aging on the secondary
circuits. The latter, however, brought about much longer investigations given the related
questions of safety issues involved. Therefore from this time onward, the reactor has only
been in operation for short campaigns of an experimental nature.

      At the same time, serious thought devoted to the back end of the nuclear cycle, has
emphasized the significance of FRs and the role they might play in the management of
plutonium and the transmutation of long-term nuclear waste. The associated research and
development programs, CAPRA and SPIN have been designed to provide answers that will fit
into the framework of the Law of 1991, which has set the final date of 2006 for convincing
solutions to the question of nuclear waste to be put forward.

     Viewed within this context, PHENDC, alongside SUPERPHENDC, appeared to be an
important tool. This importance has, of course, become even greater since the decision to shut
down SUPERPHENDC was made.

      These elements, establishing the probability of operation until about the year 2004 in
order to take the operation deadlines for irradiations into account, led to the launching in 1993
of a «reactor rejuvenation» project It is founded on a detailed assessment of the reactor's
actual state and takes the requirements set down by the French safety authorities into account.

      This whole operation is entitled «The PHENDC Reactor Lifetime Extension Project».

      The aspects which interest us here are those which, for the purpose of assessing the
condition of the materials to justify prolonged operation, have yielded knowledge. We shall
comment first and foremost on aspects concerning the nuclear steam supply system
understood as the reactor block and the secondary circuits, including the steam generator.

      What we are dealing with is a whole entity built, for the most part of stainless steels and
which operates within a temperature range of 350 to 550°C (600°C locally), under low
pressure, in a sodium environment, neutral gas or air ( water-steam under high pressure for
steam generator tubes).
      Two essential elements contribute to the importance and pertinence of the data
acquisition :
      First, the effort expended in reconstituting the original state of the reactor at the time of
its commissioning (a re-examination of its design and construction, the thermal-mechanical
loads and chemical environments...) and the consequences,
      And second, the accessibility of the secondary circuits which has allowed a great
number of detailed examinations to be carried out.

242
2.     BEHAVIOR OF THE MATERIALS, THEIR AGING UNDER
       TEMPERATURE

PHENDC uses a whole range of important steels :

      Austenitic stainless steels of the following type :

            18% chrome-10% nickel, low or medium carbon content, some stabilized with
titanium, others not;
            17% chrome-12% nickel plus molybdenum low or medium carbon, either
stabilized or not with titanium ;

     Chrome, nickel and molybdenum (in a composition 19-12-2, 16-8-2...), in the form of
welding products ;

      Ferritics ( non-alloyed or slightly alloyed with chrome and molybdenum);
austenoferritics (in the form of molded products).

      Such diversity created a need for data in the assessment of the materials through
calculation and the opportunity of completing the basis. Thus, knowledge of these materials
sometimes lacking, sometimes requiring confirmation, especially in the aging state, has been
completed. Such is the case of the Z6 CNT 18-10 and the Z6 CN 18-10 steels with regard to
low cycle fatigue characterization (consolidation, symmetrization, fatigue strength) and of
course in an aged state (one hundred thousand hours) at service temperatures for the
instrumentation concerned, (i.e. the major secondary circuit piping and the steam generators).

     In the field of creep rupture and creep strain, the study has been expanded to include the
Z2 CND 17-12 steel, for the specialized field dealing with short time periods and high
temperatures (pertinent for certain accident sequences).

      The most notable effects of aging deal with the secondary creep speeds in the Z6 CNT
18-10 steel which are several times higher (by a factor of ten) than at the non-aged state ( see
figure 1).

      In the field of welding filler metals, research on the embrittlement of the «cold» parts of
the circuits has been carried out (temperature range : 350-400°C). Thus, a program verifying
toughness in an aged state was conducted, based on the grade of steel present in the secondary
circuits(19-12-2). The embrittlement of molded austeno-ferritic steels was assessed in
comparison to its initial state after 75000 to 90000 hours at 350 to 400°C. This first involves
tension and impact strength measurements performed at ambient temperature for samples on
the primary pump and both ambient and service temperatures for samples taken from the
secondary circuits. Concerning this last case, an ongoing program is performing toughness
measurements and also examining the effect of overaging

      Simultaneous knowledge of toughnesses and impact strengths at both cold and hot
temperatures will enable us to test the correlations (commonly used for PWRs in particular)
while being aware of the fact that the ferrite contents, a bit lower in the PHENIX reactor, are a
potential source of deviation.



                                                                                             243
                          S T E E L 3 2 1 - S e c o n d a r y creep a t 550°C




                                                                     *     in-s ervice aged state
                                                                           (~1 00 000 h a 550"C)

                                                                              / state- Average law


       Q_                                                        i

       S
       w
                                                        •   '"                                       >

        V)                                     i


       £
                                                                                  •'
                                         I^


       w                             *


                             ,   *




                                                   •             ,.
                                         F
                      ^
                »




        100    -,                    '                                                               -— -
             1.E-08        1.E-07              1.E-06        1 ,E-05     1.E-04        1.E-03   1.E-02      1.E-01


                                              s e c o n d a r y creep speed (1/h)


                                         FIG. 1 Secondary creep speed for steel 321



      Verification regarding the state of the sensitivity of various materials to intercrystalline
corrosion (basic materials, filler materials, welding heat affected zone) has also been
accomplished in the present aging state. Overall confirmation of the diagrams on this subject
was thus obtained concerning «low» temperatures and long time periods. This remains a field
in which very little data is available. A few deviations or rather, peculiarities in behavior were
also observed. For the austenitic steel with molybdenum and low carbon from the reactor
block (and in its welded zones), the «nose» of the sensitivity diagram (short time period and
high temperature), was defined by specific tests performed on non-aged material. The purpose
of this was to demonstrate the harmlessness of the initial stripping treatments performed on
the welds of the materials.


3.      BEHAVIOR OF THE STRUCTURE                                                        MATERIALS           UNDER
        IRRADIATION

       Since we are dealing here with structures operating at 400°C, (the supporting elements
of the reactor core), it has been shown that the upper diagrid plate in its central zone (which
will have integrated 1.75 ± 36% dpa NRT for iron at the end of its lifetime) will sustain a
slight embrittlement. Verification of this effect is to be carried out on the structural base of an
assembly (an extractable component) which has remained within the reactor for the quasi-
totality of its present lifetime. On the lower structures, the anticipated effect is negligible. The
structures exposed to high temperatures (above the core), where the potential effect of the
irradiation is different and becomes evident by an embrittlement of the grain boundaries

244
caused by helium, (which itself results from the transmutation of the boron and nickel), are, in
fact, only slightly affected in the PHENDC reactor owing to the efficiency of its top neutron
shielding.


4.      KNOWLEDGE OF THE THERMAL-MECHANICAL LOADS

      Studies conducted on the PHENK reactor in this field provided the first practical
industrial application of recent developments in thermomechanics, particularly those
concerning the Large-Scale Simulations of turbulence in the calculation of flow instabilities.
Thus, the mixing of fluid sprays at different temperatures having led to the cracking of a
secondary piping zone at a «T» level were analyzed in their fluctuating aspect. This study,
incidentally, has become presently the object of international intercomparisons (see figure 2).

     The core outlet zone has also been the object of extremely minute modeling in order to
evaluate the effect of heat fluctuations on the lower structures of the above core structure.
On an even greater scale, an overall modeling of the bottom of the hot plenum in all its
geometric complexity, including the inter-assembly, aims at assessing the fluctuating aspect of
the inner containment vessel's stratification and at establishing both its extent and its temporal
and spatial characteristics (either local or extensive). This program includes the design and
construction of a new thermometric rod on the reactor which will be sensitive enough to
cross-check calculations.

      Such advances must quite logically lead to the evaluation of the mechanical
consequences on the structures in terms of random fatigue or crackling. This will take place in
the near future by coupling mechanical codes, by carrying out complementary studies focusing
on the response of the materials in terms of damage and, in fine, a complete approach
methodology for these problems.


5.     MECHANICAL DESIGN

       A few examples will be cited here illustrating the significance of the PHENDC feedback
in the field of design.

      In the field of angle weld fatigue, an experimental program has been set up. It has
allowed various parameters to be tested such as the effect of back welding, the effect of
medium stress and the effect of a crossing with a perpendicular weld. These results, apart
from the immediate application made of them for reactor files, can be used for design
methodology, be it on the basis of linearized stresses and coefficients or a local analysis
obtained with a detailed modeling. In several cases, it has been necessary to carry out an
experimental study involving the strength of special welds against primary stresses.This study
revealed the extreme conservatism of current rules concerning ductile materials.

      In the field of cyclical loads of the same special welds, the inadapted nature of
simplified, present day rules (through the weld coefficients) has become evident whether it be
in the progressive strains or in the fatigue-creep. This has brought about the extensive use of



                                                                                              245
                          L1GNE SECONDAIRE PHENIX
                S i m u l a t i o n d e s grandes c c h c l f e s d u m e l a n g e
                                    en aval d'un p i q u a g e
                E v o l u t i o n daas le t&mps des isolhertnes
                 dans le p l a n de s y m e t r i c l o n g i t u d i n a l




               ISO   ESfACKES DE:    340,00 - 3SJ.OO
                     3 icgre* C      •"SS DO - 370. HO    "T   ' "•
                                     3T3 DC - 3-SS Gfl   418 00




                              . 2 : PHENIX Secondary Line
      Large-Scale Simulation of the mix downstream from a sampling/connection.
            Evolution in time of isotherms, in a lengthwise symmetry view




246
the recently developed A16 [1] project guide which is dedicated to the assessment of defects.
Thanks to this, important feedback is now available and can be used :

      in comparison with experimental points involving very long lengths of time since the
welds after functioning for 50.000 hours in the reactor have been removed and examined by
experts for appraisal,

     in comparison with experimental programs which have been carried out or are still
ongoing.

This feedback puts forward two essential questions concerning the following :
      the need to reduce conservatism ;

      the need to take mixed creep modes into account.

       The free surface zone of the PHENEX reactor's primary containment has been the object
of a carefully drafted file especially with respect to the question of buckling and thermal stress
ratcheting, mechanisms that can cause plastic strains. Geometric measurements made in this
relatively accessible zone of the reactor will prove to be of great significance in evaluating the
precision of the methods and must be planned at least at the end of life. The major secondary
circuit pipes have been the object of damage reconstitution. At the same time, they have been
and will once again be inspected by a non-destructive control. Furthermore, dismantling and
removal operations are now underway on certain sites appearing to have accumulated the most
amount of damage. Comparison of these results is of the greatest value when one knows that
the complexity of the damage suffered by a component, particularly during creep conditions,
can prove to be significant for :

      The analysis of the stresses and strains ;

      The estimation of the stress acting under heat conditions ;

      A consideration of the local effects (welds, geometric discontinuities).

      Finally, in a different field, the seismic re-evaluation of all buildings has revealed the
necessity of devoting deep thought to the methodology and criteria that must be applied to the
study of existing facilities.


6.     HIGH TEMPERATURE INTERGRANULAR CRACKING OF
       WELDED JOINTS

       Feedback from PHENTX includes observations regarding intergranular cracking under
heat conditions in the area around the welded joints that have stimulated R&D work given the
fact that conventional methods of design do not deal with these questions or do not enable us
to be sufficiently aware of them.

      First and foremost, this concerns the Z6 CNT 18-10 steel which is known to have a
certain sensitivity to the phenomenon termed relaxation cracking. Observed on certain parts of
the major secondary pipes, in the buffer tanks and on the headers on the top floors of steam


                                                                                              247
generators, the problem was to approach it quantitatively so as to establish definite
conclusions about other components. A procedure was designed, designating as its point of
departure, the strained state and the precipitation of the zones in question as principally
determining the cracking. This state was simulated on a mass material, and the intergranular
cracking under only one imposed movement was reproduced in a laboratory, (see figure 3)

                ESSAIS DE RELAXATION SUR EPROUVETTES CT




                                                  700 jjm de propagation intergranulaire


                                                                     zat simulee scrouie vieillie

                                                                      metal de base vieilli en service




                          400      600      800        1000      1200         Pas de propagation
                                temps (h)

                       FIG. 3 : Experiments of relaxation with CT specimen
                   (squares) : simulated heat effected zone (hardened and aged)
                             (diamonds) : aged basis metal (in service)


      This result, unusual in light of the present day acquired experimental data (almost
exclusively built on new material), at least proves that important ingredients contributing to
cracking have been identified in simulations of the thermally affected zones of the welds.
A damage model has been elaborated and adjusted on the basis of tests causing the multi-
axialty of the strains to vary. The overall procedure will thus be available very soon in Order to
deal with industrial situations.

Creep damage is also thought to have led the appearance of intergranular cracks in certain
welded assemblies particularly large and flanged ones in Z6 CN 18-10 steel. Apparently, the
data and conventional methods which in particular neglect the residual stresses of welding do
not properly reveal these findings. Accordingly, another program was launched for the
purpose of measuring and modeling them, and to grasp the behavior of the products in
question (creep ductility, sensitivity to the multi-axialty of the stresses...). Modeling, moving
on to the simulation of welding and the superposition of the operating conditions will
accompany a complete structural test which is to be performed on the representative
component.

     These problems are important for they have appeared after 100 000 hours of operation
and whether they call into question present damage evaluation methods or design rules


248
governing welded assemblies, they are at the very heart of lifetime extension concerns. They
have been observed on steels that are similar to those developed after PHENIX, and then-
study provides us with an opportunity to confirm these choices by taking advantage of the
compositional differences existing among the three different steel grades, which appear as so
many parameters for serious thought about the metallurgy.

      The project has provided an opportunity to test local mechanical approaches on an
intermediate scale (quite typically the one used in metallography and the one for the grain) in
order to attempt to link up metallurgical evolution due to in-service aging and intergranular
damage to the macroscopic mechanical behavior. Within the framework of the project, these
questions have brought about an international exchange and a thesis has been written on the
subject under the direction of the Ecole des Mines in Paris.


7.     EVALUATION OF THE HARMFULNESS OF DEFECTS

      The demands related to the prolonged operation of the PHENIX reactor have led us to
focus on hypothetical defects which, in the various operating conditions envisioned, might
question the principle safety functions, and among these, the control of the reactivity.
Therefore the extension of such defects, penetrating the great shells which make up the core
support structure, had to be evaluated. In order to facilitate their early detection, the geometric
disorders associated with much shorter defects constituted another point of interest in the
specification of surveillance methods.

      At first the analyses were carried out in the case involving the elastic linear behavior of
the material by using formulas of existing stress intensity, often coming from studies on plates
and arranged by a curb correction.

      These formulas turned out to be exaggeratedly conservative, the result being that new
formulas, built on a calculation basis of specific finite elements were put together. These
formulas, constructed for cones and cylinders whose radius ratios over thickness are on the
order of 150 to 250, deal with length defects extending to the radius of the shell or indeed
even beyond that. They have been the object of cross-checks with other formulas in their
common validity field and have results in documentation. They are henceforward available for
other applications. Elastoplastic calculations allowing direct access to the «J» cracking force
have also been carried out.

      These calculations, bringing into play crossing length defects which may go beyond the
radius of the shells, have been dealt with using a mixed modeling of shells and mass solids.
Major feedback is to be found as much on the level of the cracking force (whose value
conditions the critical size) as it is in the field of the associated movements, but the essential
finding to be derived from both elements amounts to this : the care taken in the modeling of
the boundary conditions, as is also the case in buckling, is of prime importance. Therefore, in
the case of a fast reactor block, practically all the structures must be represented. This type of
calculation has also provided the opportunity to confirm the pre-eminence of loads of a
 mechanical origin before those of thermal origin owing to their «J» contribution.




                                                                                                249
8.     THE EFFECTS OF MANUFACTURING CONDITIONS
      It is interesting to list the number of times an expert appraisal of observed damage has
been traced to manufacturing conditions, which, for any new construction must at least
involve the responsibility of being able to trace even the slightest details.

      Regarding this subject, we could cite as an example the use of chemical cleaning
treatments which are too corrosive given the material in question (high carbon austenitic
forged material and in a zone where welding is concerned, for instance). It might also be
stated that certain methods applied (forming) have proven to be too severe. The inadapted
character of certain thermal treatments has also been confirmed (the re-quenching of
austenitics after shaping and welding). In welds, local repairs have sometimes been cited as
having caused damage by creating a rather special type of stress, i.e. that of a membrane.

      In certain cases, the welding procedure parameters have been called into question
(excessive energy input).

       Feedback on cracking in hot conditions in deposit metals with an austenitic base can
also be drawn from the PHENDC experiment. It generally confirms what is known about the
influence of elements such as boron in the basic metal (which was the example in the case of
the first PHENIX reheaters, removed for other reasons after about approximately 50 000 hours
of operation). The same effect applies for welds in a removed metal in which the tendency of
ferritic insufficiency has been discovered and defined as a contributing deterioration factor.
However, it should be pointed out that cases of cracking under heat conditions are relatively
rare and are even more rarely suspected in the development of an in-service defect.


9.     THE EFFECTS OF OPERATING CONDITIONS

      Concerning the mastery of chemical mediums, and quite apart from certain incidents in
the past with the development of aqueous soda in the field of temperature in which austenitic
steels are sensitive, or perhaps even a radical decontamination, no significant damage has
been reported. The greatest fears concerned the secondary circuits where numerous
interventions took place after total draining of the sodium, and where non violent
sodium/water reactions occurred at the beginning of the 1980s. The reconstitution of such
mediums developed in these conditions, in as much as it remains reliable, especially locally,
has not provoked any specific worries. This is in coherence with examinations that do not
pose any questions apart from those concerning the presence of a few intergranular markings,
therefore not very deep and which are still not clearly understood. An ongoing R&D program
dealing with mediums developed in intervention conditions on sodium-soiled components
should also confirm present procedures, particularly those concerning drying with control of
the dew point at the time of renewed startup.

     Several corrosive effects on the external surfaces of the secondary circuits have also
been observed (in air) due to pollutants that have proven difficult to identify and which
emphasize the importance of mastering chemical environments on all cases.

      Last, it should be stated that the return to operating conditions illustrates the great
importance of having valves that function properly and reliably and the need to monitor them
along with the advantage of simplification in the auxiliary circuits.

250
10.    METHODS    OF                    CONTROL,              MONITORING                 AND
       INTERVENTION

      The PHENIX Lifetime Extension Project has also contributed to an improved
characterization and enhanced performances of the sodium leak detection systems, to the
determination of sizing of accessible defects through Ultrasonic controls especially on thin
austenitic products.
It has provided us with the opportunity to devote some very serious, in-depth thinking about
the monitoring of fast reactor structures with a primary integrated circuit.
Extensive studies have been carried out within the framework of this project which, given the
conditions of environment, access, precision, quality, deadlines and required cost constitute in
themselves precious feedback.


11.    CONCLUSION

      We should like to insist on the importance of the three aspects of acquired knowledge
derived from the PHENIX Lifetime Extension Project:

       The interest in re-examining our Rules of Design and Construction (RCC) [2] and
consolidating their criteria, be it on the level of the documented materials, their tabulated
properties, their design and manufacturing, the calculation methods, ( and this at all levels
including the coupling with thermal-hydraulics) and finally, adequate evaluation of the
lifetime. We shall add that the treatment of defects encountered whether they be in the field of
calculations, non-destructive controls or monitoring should form the basis of a future
publication that might be entitled «Monitoring Rules Governing the Use of Materials during
Operating Conditions»(RSEM);

       The affirmation of the importance of the welded joints in questions regarding reactor
lifetime especially during creep conditions which must lead to an increased R&D effort based
on the methods adapted to their local aspect and multi-materials.

       The interest in having the project followed up by the necessary actions that are
fundamental in profiting from the results. Incidentally, this results could in turn be usefully
completed by clearly-targeted expert appraisals (without ignoring an evaluation of the cost
versus interest, an item which must be foreseen and taken into account when a reactor reaches
its end of life).



                                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

   The authors would like to express their thanks to all the agents working at the DRN,
DTA and NOVATOME for their contribution to the studies presented herein.




                                                                                             251
                       LIST OF PARTICIPANTS

Andropenkov, S.    Mangyshlak Atomic Energy Complex,
                   BN-350 Aktau, 466200, Kazakhstan
Ashurko, Y.        Institute of Physics and Power Engineering,
                   Bondarenko Square 249020 Obninsk, Kaluzhskaja Region,
                   Russian Federation
Chetal, S.C.       Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research,
                   Kalpakkam 603 102, Tamil Nadu, India
Gubernatis, P.     CEA Centre d'etudes de Cadarache,
                   Bat 212, Saint Paul-Lez-Durance, France
Judd, A.           British Nuclear Fuel Ltd,
                   Hinton House, H480, Risley, Warrington, Cheshire, WAS 6AS,
                   United Kingdom
Jerrige, L.        CEA,
                   Central Phenix, BP 171, 30200 Bagnols Sur Ceze, France
Kapoor, R.P.       Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research,
                   Kalpakkam 603 102, Tamil Nadu, India
Kupitz, J.         International Atomic Energy Agency,
                   Division of Nuclear Power,
                   Wagramerstrasse SP.O.Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria
Miyakawa, A.       Monju Construction Office,
                   Japan Nuclear Cycle Development Institute,
                   1-banchi, 2-chome, Shiraki, Tsuruga-shi, Fukui-ken, Japan
Purvis, E., Ill    1015 Clearspring Road,
                   Damascus, MD 20872, United States of America
Rahmani, L         Electricite de France,
                   Centre Lyonnais d'lngenierie, 35-37, rue Louis Guerin,
                   69611 Villeurbanne Cedex, France
Rineiskii, A.A     International Atomic Energy Agency,
                   Division of Nuclear Power, Wagramer Strasse 5, P.O.Box 100,
                   A-1400, Vienna, Austria
Saraev, O.M        Beloyarsk Nuclear Power Plant,
                   624051, Zarechny, Sverdlovsk Region,
                   Russian Federation

Suk, S.D.          Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute,
                   P.O. Box 105 Yusong, Taejon 3050353, Republic of Korea
Srinivasan, G.R.   Nuclear Power Corporation (NPC),
                   Vikram Sarabhai Bhavan,
                   12th Floor, Anushakti Nagar,
                   Mumbai 400 094, India




                                                                               253
