              Nordisk                Nordisk       Pohjoismainen         Nordic
              kerne-                 karn-         ydin-                 nuclear
              sikkerheds-            sakerhcts-    turvallisuus-         safety
              forskning              forsknirg     tuikimus              research



RAK-2                                             NKS/RAK-2(95)TR-C1


                                                                   DK9700032




    Description of the Prototype Fast Reactor
                   at Dounreay



                             S. E. Jensen

                            P. L. Olgaard


                 Rise National Laboratory
                DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark




                            December 1995
Abstract
The Prototype Fast Reactor (PFR) at Dounreay, UK, started operation in 1975 and was closed
down in 1994. The present report contains a description of the PFR nuclear power plant, based
on information available in literature and on information supplied during a visit to the plant.
The report covers a description of the site and plant arrangement, the buildings and structures,
the reactor core and other vessel internals, the control system, the main cooling system, the
decay heat removal system, the emergency core cooling system, the containment system, the
steam and power conversion system, the fuel handling system, plant safety features, the control
and instrumentation systems and the sodium purification systems.

The report was prepared as part of the NKS RAK-2 programme.




   NKS/RAK-2(9#)TR-C1
   ISBN 87-550-2265-0

   Graphic Service, Riso, 1996

   The report can be obtained from:
   NKS Secretariat                     Phone:        +45 46 77 40 45
   P.O.Box 49                          Fax:          +45 46 35 92 73
   DK-4000 Roskilde                    http://www.risoe.dk/nks
   Denmark                             e-mail: annette.lemmensfSi.risc
                       List of Contents

                                                              Page
1. INTRODUCTION                                                1
1.1. The Dounreay Nuclear Power Development Establishment .    1
2 . SUMMARY OF DESIGN DATA                                     2
5. TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION                                        5
5.1. Site and Plant Arrangement                                 5
5.2. Buildings and Structures                                   7
5.3. Reactor Core and other Vessel Internals                    9
5.4. Reactivity Control System                                 14
5.5. Reactor Main Cooling System                              16
5.5.1. System Information                                     16
5.5.2. Reactor Vessel and Primary Cooling System              18
5.5.3. Secondary Cooling System                               20
5.5.4. Reactor Coolant Pumps                                  20
5.5.5. Steam Generators                                       23
5.5.6. Sodium-Water Interaction in Steam Generators . . . .   25
5.6. Decay Heat Removal System                                26
5.7. Emergency Core Cooling System                            26
5.8. Containment System                                       30
5.9. Steam and Power Conversion System                        32
5.10. Fuel and Component Handling and Storage Systems . . .   32
5.11. Safety Features                                         34
5.12. Control and Instrumentation Systems                     37
5.13. Sodium Purification System                              38
5.14. Electrical Power System                                 39
6. References                                                 39
 1. INTRODUCTION

 1.1. The Dounreay Nuclear Power Development Establishment


 The Dounreay Nuclear Power Development Establishment is one of
 the research centers of the UK Atomic Energy Authority. It is
 situated at the northern coast of Scotland in Caithness, about 10
 km west of the town of Thurso (cf. fig. 1.1). It was established
 in 1955.


      C * [ » Wl-31)




                                                M      0 \K     -A',-.Y .
                                                ..MMiumit   ^   -   Routes




Fig. l.l. Map of northern Scotland with Dounreay marked by arrow.
      Dounreay has been the principal center for the British
development of fast reactors. Two fast power reactors have been
built at Dounreay. Firstly the Dounreay Fast Reactor (DFR) with
an electric power of 15 MW (60 MWC) which started operation in
1960 and in 1962 became the first fast reactor power plant to
supply electicity to a national grid. The DFR was closed down in
1977. In 1975 the second fast reactor, the Prototype Fast Reactor
(PFR) was connected to the grid. It had an electric power of 250
MW. It was closed down in 1994.
      In addition to the two fast reactor power plants a fuel
reprocessing plant to process fast reactor fuel was built at
Dounreay. The plant has also been used to reprocess highly
enriched fuel from research reactors.
      In addition to the fast reactor facilities a research
reactor, the Dounreay Materials Testing Reactor, a heavy water
reactor of 10 MW, was commissioned in 1958 and closed down in
1969. Dounreay has also been the center of the British develop-
ment of submarine propulsion reactors, i.e. pressurized water
reactors. Two prototype reactors have been built and operated at
Dounreay, PWR-1 and PWR2. These have been used for testing the
plants and their components as well as new fuel loadings. In 1984
PWR-1 was closed down and converted to a full-size test rig where
loss-of-coolant accidents could be tested. The tests lasted for
4 years. The PWR2-facility, called Shore Test Facility (STF) is
provided with the same reactor plant as the Vanguard class
submarines. It is a new, all British design.



2. SUMMARY OF DESIGN DATA

Below a summary of design data is presented. It should be pointed
out that the data have been obtained from various sources and are
for that reason not necessarily consistent. Where significantly
different values have been found the newest is given first and
the older afterwards in parenthesis.
Power
Thermal power:                      6 3 0 MWt
Gross electric power:               2 5 0 MWe
Net electric power:                 2 3 5 MWe
Gross efficiency:                   39.7%
Net efficiency:                     37.3%


Core
Core height:                        0.915 m
Core diameter:                      1.47 m
Thickness of top axial blanket:     0.45 (0.102) m
Thickness of bottom axial blanket   0.457 m
Outer diameter of radial blanket:   1.84 m
Fuel inventory:                     4.1 t
PuO2 inventory:                     0.9 (1.1) t
U02 inventory:                      3.2 t
Number of fuel assemblies:          78
Number of elements in inner zone:   28 (31, 30)
Number of elements in outer zone:   44 (47, 48)
Specific power:                     230 kW/kg Pu+U
Average core power density:         380 kW/1


Fuel Assemblies
Fuel material:                      PuO2+UO2
Average fuel "enrichment":          25 wt% Pu
Inner core zone "enrichment":       23.5 (22) wt% Pu
Outer core zone "enrichment":       32.3 (28.5) wt% Pu
Number of rods per assembly:        325
Fuel pellet diameter:               5 mm
Active length of rods:              0.915 m
Total length of rods:               2.25 m
Cladding material:                  20% CWM 316
Cladding thickness:                 0.381 mm
Outer cladding diameter:            5.84 (5.58) mm
Average burn-up:                    75 000 MWcd/t Pu+U
Fuel rod lattice type:              Triangular
Outer shape of assembly:            Hexagonal
Length across shroud:                    142 mm
Shroud material:                         Stainless steel
Assembly lattice type:                   Triangular
Assembly lattice pitch:                  144.8 mm
Total assembly length:                   3 .81 m
Maximum fuel rating:                     420 W/cm fuel rod
Average fuel rating:                     259 W/cm fuel rod


Reflector
Number of radial breeder assemblies      51
Number of reflector assemblies:          81

Control
Number of control rod positions:         5
Number of shut-off rod positions         6
Number of safety rod positions:          1


Reactor Vessel
Vessel diameter:                         13.2 m
Inside vessel diameter:                  12.24 m
Vessel depth:                            15.2 m
Wall thickness:                          12.7 mm
Vessel material:                         Stainless steel

Primary Circuit
Number of cooling loops:                 3
Number of primary pumps:                 3
Pump head:                               8.22 kg/cm2
Coolant:                                 Na
Mass flow:                               3.3 (2.92) t/s
Flow velocity:                           6 m/s
Core inlet temperature:                  414 (400) °C
Core outlet temperature:                 562°C
Max cladding temperature;                700°C
Outlet pressure:                         6.8 kg/cm2
Number of steam generators:              3 groups
Mass of Na in reactor tank (prim, cir.): 919 (905) t
Secondary Circuit
Number of secondary pumps:                3
Pump head:                                4.50 kg/cm2
Steam generator inlet temperature:        532 (540) °C
Steam generator outlet temperature:       370 (360) °C
Mass of Na in secondary circuit:          226 (222) t


Turbine Generator
Number of turbo-generators:               1
HP turbine inlet temperature:             538 (516) °C
HP turbine inlet pressure:                161.7 (159) kg/cm2
HP turbine steam flow:                    237 (250) kg/s
Reheat steam pressure at IP turbine:      27.4 kg/cm.,22
Steam mass flow:                          854 t/hr
Boiler feed water temperature:            288°C
Condenser sea water inlet temperature:    8.9 °C
Condenser sea water outlet temperature:   20°C
Generator rating:                         250 MWe
Revolutions per minute:                   3000



5. TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

5.1. Site and Plant Arrangement


The site of the Dounrey Establishment is as mentioned in section
1 situated at the northern coast of Scotland. The area around the
site is flat with the rock close to the surface. At the end of
World War 2 an RAF airfield was built at the site.
      The plant arrangement is shown in fig. 5.1.1. Most of the
plant is situated in one large building complex, but the sodium
store and the seawater pumps for the condenser cooling system are
placed in seperate buildings.
      The main building complex contains the reactor, the steam
generators, the turbo-generator hall, the control room and a
facility with shielded caves for partly dismantling and initial
examination of the irradiated fuel assemblies. The reason for the
                              Site layout




1. Administration building
2. Control room
3. Reactor building
4. Steam generator building
5. Turbo-generator building
C). S o d i u m store
7. Seawalcr pump-house


   Fig.    5.1.1. Plant arrangement of the Prototype Fast Reactor


shielded caves is that the one of the major objectives of the PFR
was to test various designs of fuel assemblies. Also a number of
auxiliary plants are situated in the main building. The lay-out
of this building is shown in fig. 5.1.2.
      The reactor, steam generators and turbo-generator are
placed as closely together as possible to minimize pipe and cable
runs and simplify staffing during operation.
      The reactor is of the so-called pool type design, i.e. the
full primary circuit with reactor, coolant pumps and intermediate
heat exchangers submerged in the sodium pool in the reactor
vessel (see fig. 5.1.3). The reactor lid or roof structure
carries all the components of the primary circuit so that the
reactor vessel carries only the weight of the sodium. The use of
liquid sodium as the primary and secondary circuit coolant means
that the reactor vessel is virtually unpressurized. A slight
overpressure is maintained in the gas volume above the sodium to
ensure that any gas leakage will be outwards.
                                                       Blanket gas
                                                       clean-up plant
                                                                        Ventilation plant building
                            Steam generator building
  Generator
  transformer




                                                                            Decontamination facilities




 Diesel generator
 building




                                                                                Administration building

                                                            Main entrance


                    Fig. 5.1.2. Lay-out of PFR main building.


      The secondary sodium circuit transports the heat from the
intermediate heat exchangers to the steam generators. Here steam
is produced and sent to the turbine. This arrangement means that
any leak in the steam generator will only affect the non-radio-
active sodium of the secondary circuit.


5.2. Buildings and Structures

The reactor is situated in a steel framed building, clad with
pre-cast concrete panels to give the desired strength and low
PFR heat removal and steam plant
 1. Turbine                          11. Intermediate heat exchanger
 2. Evaporator                       12. Reheater
 3. Boiling water circulating pump   13. Steam condenser
 4. Steam drum                       14. Cooling water
 5. Superheater                          (inlet and outlet)
 6. Secondary sodium pump                a. Sea water — in
 7. Sodium expansion tank                b. Sea water — out
 8. Operating floor                  15. Generator
 9. Primary sodium pump
10. Core



                    Fig. 5.1.3. The PFR nuclear power plant


 leakage rate.
      The reactor vessel is placed in a concrete lined vault
which rests on the natural rock below ground level. This means
that it is only necessary to provide radiation shielding in
upwards direction. This shielding consists of the reactor roof
structure, consisting of a sufficiently thick concrete plate.
      Above the core the roof structure contains a rotating
shielding plug, used in connection with refueling. The gas-tight
seal between the rotating plug and the roof structure is a
cylindrical plate moving in a circular runnel filled with
mercury. This arrangement is called a dip-seal. The rotating plug
is, due to a number of penetrations, of extra thickness and
filled with iron shots and epoxy resin to improve its shielding
effectiveness.
5.3. Reactor Core and other Vessel Internals


The reactor core consists of 78 fuel assemblies. It is divided
into two zones with different enrichments. The inner zone con-
tains about 2 8 fuel assemblies with a plutonium/uranium content
of 22%/78%. The outer zone contains about 44 assemblies with a
plutonium/uranium content of 2 8.5%/71.5%. The higher plutonium
content of the outer zone results in a more uniform power density
distribution in radial direction. The total content of plutonium
and of uranium in the core is about 1 and 3 tons, respectively.
      A cross section of a typical rector core loading is shown
in fig. 5.3.1. At the center there is a guide tube for instru-




    Reflector assemblv

    Radial breeder assemblv

    Outer zone
0   fuel assemblv

    Shut-off rod

    Inner zone
    fuel assembly
    Guide tube
    (instrumentation)

    Control rod

    Experimental assembly


               Fig. 5.3.1. Typical core lay-out for PFR.


mentation, and this tube is surrounded by the inner zone fuel
assemblies. Next comes the outer zone fuel assemblies. At the
interface between the two zones 5 control rods and 6 experimental
                               10

assemblies are placed. Additional instrumentation guide tubes
exist in various positions of the reactor. Outside the outer zone
comes the radial breeder assemblies and finally the reflector
assemblies. 5 shut-off rods are placed at the interface between
the outer core zone and the radial breeder assemblies.
      The standard fuel element is 3.81 m long. At the outside it
is provided with a hexagonal shroud (wrapper) with a distance of
142 mm across the flats. It contains 325 fuel rods, each with an
outer diameter of 5.84 mm and about 2.25 m long. The fuel
material is (Pu+U) O2-pellets and the cladding a stainless steel
alloy. The cladding thickness is 0.381 mm. The rods are arranged
in a triangular lattice. The rods are at intervals supported by
honeycomb grids. The active length of the fuel pins, i.e. the
plutonium containing length, is 0.915 m.
      Above and below the active length the fuel rods contain a
top and bottom blanket section of depleted UO2-pellets, and below
the bottom blanket section the rods are provided with a 1190 mm
long fission gas plenum to limit the pressure build-up inside the
cladding tubes. Above the top blanket section of the fuel rods
and inside the hexagonal shroud a cluster of 19 shorter rods
containing depleted UO2-pellets is situated. This cluster is part
of the top blanket; the rods which have a diameter of 19 mm, are
provided with heavy fins which swirl the outlet coolant to mix it
before a coolant sample is taken out of the reactor to detect any
failed fuel pin. This detection system is based on a measurement
of delayed neutrons,- signals from the individual assemblies and
from the bulk coolant are provided. The detection system will
automatical initiate a reactor shut-down if a serious fuel
failure is detected on a two-out-of-three basis. At the top the
assemblies are provided with a gag and a circular handling head.
      At the bottom the fuel assembly is provided with a spike
assembly and a inlet filter. An assembly is shown in fig. 5.3.2.
      Initially the burn-up target for the PFR fuel assemblies
was the fissioning of 7.5% of the heavy nuclei of the fuel
(corresponding to 62000 MWd/t), but this target has gradually
been surpassed by design improvements. Fuel irradiation in PFR
                                                        11


                                                                                        Lilting lugs




                                                                                        Orientation bar



                                                                                         Sodium vtnts lor cooling during
                                                                                         post irradiation fuel handling

                                                                                       - Orien
                                                                                         Sodium lakt off for
                                                                                         bunt pin detection
                                                                                         Sealed housing for
                                                                                         BPD spring
                                                                                 Top
                                                                                       . M/B pin upper end grid



                                                                                         Mu*r breeder pin
                                                                                       "** Wrapper tube shoulder

                                                                                       _, M/B pin lower end grid

                                                                                         Fuel pin upper end grid




                                                                                         Wrapper

                                                                                         Fuel pin


                                                                   Upper axial   f       Corner post



                                                         U         blanket
                                                                   pellets , .
                                                                                         Honeycomb grid




                                                               \
                                                                                 u
                                                                   Core
                                                                   fuel
                                                                   pellets


                                                        S-A/


                                          Fission gas
                                          plenum
                                                         ffl
                                                               • Fuel
                                                                 platform.




Simplified cutaway diagram
of fuel assembly                 Bottom                                                   Filler

 1. Top (at                                                                               Spikt bending aar
 3. Axial breeder
 1. Cnd
 4. Wrapper
 5. Fuel pins                                                                             Ball ioint
 S. Spike assembly
 T. Filter                                                                                Soikt ooltom bearing cup
 I. Depleted uranium breeder
 9. Mixed uranium/ pluunmim
    oxide fuel
10. Depleted uranium breeder
II. Gas plenum



                        Fig. 5.3.2. PFR fuel assembly and fuel pin.
                                            12

has proved that fissioning of 15% of the heavy nuclei can be
achieved and 20% (168000 MWd/t) seems within reach. Some 93000
fuel pins have been irradiated in PFR with only a few pin
failures.
      Various cladding materials have been studied, e.g. advanced
optimized austenitic steels, ferritic steels and Nimonic alloys.
The best results were obtained with Nimonic PE16 cladding.
      The plutonium enrichment and the isotopic composition of
plutonium of the fuel assemblies varies with time. In fig. 5.3.3.
              34i
                                  Plutonium enrichment


              33




                                                    % Pu in plutonium




                                              ISO
                                         % Pu       in plutonium




                           % Pu       in plutonium
              2S
                   '   2   3      4     5   6     7   8     9       10
                                      Number of core cycles
 Fig. 5.3.3. PFR core plutonium enrichment versus core cycles.

this variation is shown for outer zone assemblies. It is seen
from fig. 5.3.3. that the enrichment increases with the number of
core cycles, but the content of 239Pu decreases somewhat while the
content of 240Pu increases and so does that of 241Pu and 242Pu.
      The radial breeder assemblies are externally identical to
                                13
the fuel assemblies. The breeder assemblies contain 85 wire-
wrapped rods with a diameter of 13.5 mm. These rods are depleted
U02-rods, clad by stainless steel. They are also provided with a
fission gas plenum below the U02-section. The breeder assemblies
were initially designed for fissioning of 1% of the heavy
nuclides (8000 MWd/t), but the highest burn-up achieved was 3% of
the heavy nuclides or 25000 MWd/t.
      The reflector assemblies are filled with steel rods which
serve to reduce the neutron leakage out of the reactor and
thereby increase the breeding ratio.
       It should be noticed that the PFR served as a test bed for
fuel assembly development, and therefore the fuel loading varied
to accomodate the experimental needs.
      The fuel assemblies are installed in the core in groups of
six around a leaning post which may contain a control rod or a
guide tube. By use of an offset mechanism at the grid plate below
the fuel assemblies the assembly wrappers are forced against the
leaning post. This construction prevents vibrations of the free-
standing assemblies.
       The reactor core as shown in fig. 5.3.1 is surrounded by a
neutron shield consisting of 6 rows of steel tubes filled with
graphite. This shield prevents the neutrons from reaching the
sodium of the secondary cooling circuit. This means that the
sodium of the secondary circuit does not become radioactive.
       The sodium coolant flows upwards through the fuel assem-
blies, and the flow will exert upward thrust on the assemblies.
This thrust is balanced by use of a hydraulic hold-down design.
No mechanical hold-down design is provided, but fuel instrumenta-
tion tubes, suspended from the rotating shield plug, limits any
possible rise of the assemblies.
       The reactor and shielding arrangement is surrounded by a
"reactor jacket" or a steel skirt which extends almost to the
bottom of the reactor vessel. The upper part of the jacket
carries 3 pairs of intermediate heat exchangers (i.e. 6 IHX) . The
jacket is clad with quilted stainless steel insulation packs and
separates the hot sodium leaving the core from the cooler sodium
leaving the intermediate heat exchangers.
                                 14

5.4. Reactivity Control System


The core is controlled by use of 5 tantalum (Mk I) control rods
and 5 boron carbide (Mk II) shut-off rods. Initially the central
position of the core was used for a safety rod. The control rods
are placed at the interface between the inner and the outer zone.
The shut-off rods are placed around the perifery of the outer
zone. After operational experience with these two types of
control rods had been obtained, it was decided that the tantalum
rods should not be further developed, and that future rods for
the PFR should be of the boron carbide type.
      The control rods are worth between 16 and 17 dollars and
the worth of the shut-off rods is 7 dollars. The reactor can not
be made critical before all 5 shut-off rods are fully withdraw
from the core. The reactor will be shut down if any 3 of the 10
rods are inserted into the core. A total of 3000 rod drops has
performed and on no occation did any rod fail to respond as
intended. The control rods have a lifetime of 530 equivalent full
power days (efpd) and the lifetime of the shut-off rods is 1760
efpd. All rods of either type may not be changed at one time. If
all control rods are withdrawn at maximum speed, the reactivity
increase will be 2.64 cents/s. The resulting power increase will
be stopped either by the power deviation trip or by the core
outlet temperature trip. In none of these cases will the maximum
cladding temperature exceed 740°C and sodium boiling as well as
fuel melting will be avoided by a large margin.
      The boron carbide rods contain inside a hexagonal wrapper
of PE16 Nimonic alloy a cluster of 19 absorber pins. These pins
consist of stainless steel cladding tubes containing cylindrical
boron carbide pellets. The cladding tubes are on the inside
coated with copper to prevent diffusion of boron from the pellets
into the cladding with consequent embrittlement. Helium gas,
produced by neutron capture in 10B, is vented into the sodium
through a lute tube and plenum at the top of the pins. The pins
are cooled by a sodium flow up through the pin cluster. A boron
carbide control rod is shown in fig. 5.4.1.
                                                 15



                                             Top end •
                                             cap


                           Ballast
                           weights

                           Coolant
                           outlet ports
      Hexagonal
      wrapper




                                             Lute -
                                             inner                             Wire
                                                                               wrap\
                                             tube



                                                                . Vent
                                                                  hole
                                                                           pellet        Support
                                             B4C pellet _   _
                                                                           No. 35      ' piece
                                             No. 1

                                                                           Bottom
                                          Cladding tube —
                          -Coolant                                         end cap
     Guide spike-
                           inlet ports



                    (a)                                                  (b)



  Fig. 5.4.1. PFR Mk II control rod: (a) rod housing (b) pin.


      The Mk II boron carbide pins used 20% cold-worked M316
steel cladding tubes of 21.5 mm external diameter and 1 mm wall
thickness with a 0.15 mm inside copper lining. The boron carbide
pellet stack length is 88 cm and the pellet diameter 19 mm. Later
pin designs have different dimensions, but the general design was
similar. However, the cladding material was PE16 Nimonic alloy in
the later versions. In Mk IV the pins were bottom vented by use
of the diving bell principle.
      The drive mechanisms for the all absorber rods are situated
on and above the rotating shielding plug. Both the rods and the
drop-off magnets may be removed for maintenance. The rods are
attached to the drive mechanisms by a bayonet connection. This
means that the rods can be detached and remain in the core when
the rotating shielding plug is moving during refueling. A
sweeping arm is used to ensure that all control rods have been
disconnected before the rotating plug is moved. The control rods
                               16
are moved by screw and nut motors, driven through a reduction
gear. The connection between the nut and the absorber rod is
arranged by use of a magnetic assembly, so that the rod can be
dropped into the core in case of an emergency.
      During refueling both the control and the shut-off rods are
delatched and remain in the core. The safety rod could remain
outside the core during refueling, ready for insertion.


5.5. Reactor Main Cooling System

5.5.1. System Information

The main cooling system consists of the primary sodium circuit,
three independent secondary sodium circuits, and three steam
generators delivering steam for one turbo generator unit (see
fig. 5.5.1) .
      The main data for the circuits are the following.


      Primary and Secondary Sodium Heat Transfer System:


      Reactor vessel inside diameter                 12.24 m
      Temperature at core inlet                      400cC
      Temperature at core outlet                     562°C
      Temperature at steam generator inlet           532°C
      Temperature at steam generator outlet          370°C
      Flow through core and breeder                   2923 kg/s
      Total flow for three secondary circuits         2923 kg/s
      Pump heads, three primary pumps                 8.22 kg/cm2
      Pump heads, three secondary pumps               4.50 kg/cm2
      Sodium weight in reactor vessel                 905 t
      Sodium weight in secondary circuit              222 t


      Turbine System:


      Steam temperature at HP and IP TSV's            516°C
      Steam pressure a t HP TSV                       161.7 kg/crtf
      Reheat steam pressure at IP TSV                 27.4kg/ctrr
                                                                       De-aerator
Thermal syphon                                                             85 ft
 heat exchanger                                                      Pump
                                                                 . Evaporator




                                                                                              H.P. Turbine   I.P. Turbine




                              Sodium expansion tank                                                                                    ^Make-up supply
                                                      => H.P. ieed water heaters
                                                                                                                                              ea water in
                                                                                                                                             Condenser
            Operating floor
                                                                                                                                             Sea water out
                                                       To condenser
                                                                                    Turbine                          Condensate
                                                                                                                     polishing plant
                                                      Discharge pump                Direct contact feed heater and pumps




                                              Fig. 5.5.1. PFR reactor, heat removal and steam plant.
                               18
     Steam flow in HP turbine                          2 4 9 . 9 kg/s
     Min. steam flow at which full superheat
      and reheat temps. are maintained                 20%
      Boiler feed water temperature                    2 8 8 °C
      Condenser pressure                               25 mm Hg
      Condenser sea water temp, inlet                  8 . 9 °C
      Condenser sea water temp, outlet                2 0 . 0°C


       TSV is the turbine stop valve. The whole of the primary-
circuit is contained within the stainless steel vessel (pool
tank) . The primary circuit is divided into a cold pool and a hot
pool, separated by the "reactor jacket".
      Three main pumps circulates sodium from the cold pool
through the reactor core and the neutron shield to the internal
heat exchangers (IHX) where it is cooled to 400°C before retur-
ning to the cold pool.
      The secondary circuit consists of three independent loops,
each comprising two internal heat exchangers (IHX) in the pool
vessel, one main pump and one steam generator.
      The evaporators and the heat exchangers of the              steam
generating system are vertically mounted "U"-tube units.

5.5.2 Reactor Vessel and Primary Cooling System


The reactor pool tank is a cylindrical stainless steel vessel,
12.2 m diameter and 15.2 m deep with 12.7 mm wall thickness.
It is suspended from the fixed roof structure (see fig. 5.5.2.1) .
All components inside the core are also suspended from the roof,
thus minimizing the stresses on the vessel.
      The reactor vessel is surrounded by a safety vessel or a
leak jacket, made up of low alloy steel. This leak jacket is also
suspended from the roof. The purpose of the jacket is to limit
the drop of the liquid metal level in the reactor vessel,
following a sodium leak in the vessel.
      A major design problem, to limit the thermal stress in the
upper part of the vessel, was solved by graduating the thickness
of the isolation giving an acceptable axial temperature gradient
                                        19




             A.    Sodium pump motor (3)     K.   Rotating shield
             B.    Primary sodium pump (3)   L.   Biological shield
             C.    Charge machine console    M.   Stainless steel insulation
              D.   Charge machine            N.   Diagrid support structure
             E.    Rotor                     0.   Primary vessel
              F.   Control rod drives        P.   Leak jacket and insulation
             G.    Control rods              Q.   Diagrid
              H.   Core                      R.   Secondary sodium pipes
             J.    Neutron shield            S.   Intermediate heat exchanger



Fig. 5.5.2.1. Vertical cross section of PFR reactor vessel
                               20

from the sodium surface to the roof.
      The core grid plate, the core and the neutron shield are
carried by a cylindrical and downwards conical structure, welded
to the roof.
      The IHX units (fig. 5.5.2.2) transfer heat from the primary
radioactive sodium circuit to the three secondary non-radioactive
circuits.
      The PFR has 6 IHX units, each designed to transfer 100 MWt.
The IHX units are of the counterflow shell and tube type
containing 1540 tubes each. The tube outside diameter is 19 mm,
and they are 4.57 m long.
      Primary sodium flows through the tubes, and expansion
between the tubes and the shell is accommodated by sinusoidal
bends on the tubes.
      The IHX units are suspended from the reactor roof. Each
unit contains a coil for decay heat removal through the NaK
circuit (see section 5.7. Emergency Core Cooling System).


5.5.3. Secondary Cooling System

The PFR operates with three secondary sodium cooling loops and a
tertiary steam/water system. One secondary system comprises the
secondary part of two intermediate heat exchangers (IHX), a
secondary coolant pump, an expansion tank, and the primary part
of the corresponding evaporator/reheater/superheater       (Fig.
5.5.1) .


5.5.4. Reactor Coolant Pumps


The primary circuit is provided with three mechanical sodium
pumps. These pumps are of a vertical construction with the double
inlet type impeller placed at the bottom of the sodium pool.
      The main characteristics are:


      Flow rate:                                 84,000 1/min.
      Discharge:                                 8.9 kg/cm2
      Working temperature:                       43 0 °C
                                   21




         C L shield




                      Primary sodium




Fig. 5.5.2.2. PFR intermediate heat exchanger,
                               22

      Speed variation by hydraulic coupling:     5:1


      The rotating part of the pumps is supported by a con-
ventional roller bearing at the top of the pump head, and by a
sodium lubricated hydrostatic bearing just above the impeller.
Sodium is fed to this bearing from the pump discharge casing. The
bearing material is stellite 6.
      An oil lubricated face seal provide a leak tight barrier
between the reactor cover gas (argon) and the atmosphere. At one
occasion oil from the seal (and from the roller bearing?) leaked
into the sodium pool in a total amount of about 200 1. This
incident necessitated a full clean up of the primary circuit.
      The pumps are driven by normal squirrel cage induction
motors. A speed variation of 5:1 is obtained by hydraulic
couplings. Adequate shut-down circulation is provided by running
the main pumps with pony-motors.
      The pumps are designed with close attention to avoid noise.
In designing the pumps special care has been taken to avoid noise
from the impeller blades. High frequency noise caused by
cavitation can be confused by that produced by boiling sodium,
and thus disturb the instrument recordings. By careful shaping of
the impeller blades, high frequency noise has been reduced.
      The secondary pumps are vertical pumps of the centrifugal
type, with a mixed flow impeller delivering sodium at an angle to
the pump axis. The coolant flow is straightened in a bowl type
diffuser.
      The main characteristics are:

      Flow rate:                    75,000 1/min.(one pump)
      Discharge:                    4.5 kg/cm2
      Working temperature:          370 °C


      The pumps are driven by induction motors. Maximum speed is
960 rev/min. This speed can be reduced by the hydraulic coup-
lings. The pumps are equipped with pony motors for shut down
operation.
                                23
5.5.5. Steam Generators


The PFR has three independent secondary loops. Each secondary
loop is connected to a 200 MW steam generator. The steam
generator is the plant component which, next to the reactor,
contains the greatest technical innovations. The three secondary
loops with steam generators are entirely separated from each
other with the exception of common dumping and clean-up faciliti-
es .
      Fig. 5.5.1 shows one secondary loop, comprising evapora-
tor, reheater, and superheater. Fig. 5.5.5.1 shows the evapora-
tor, reheater, and superheater in some detail.
      During the early operation the steam generators, in
particular the evaporators, gave rise to leakage problems. The
tube/tubeplate weld design could not be stress relieved after
fabrication and a number of weld leaks developed. After some tube
plugging and attempts of shot peening the problem was solved by
bypassing the welds by use of a sleeving technique.
About 1000 welds on each of the 3 evaporators were sleeved.
      Similar welds were used in the austenitic stainless steel
superheater and reheater units. During the early operation leaks
occured in two superheaters and one reheater unit. The leaks
caused stress-corrosion cracking in the tube-plate material. The
superheaters were returned to service after repair, but in the
case of the reheater the cracking was so severe that the plant
was started without it. Because of concern for new leaks - which
did not materialize - a new design was developed which eliminated
the welds between tube and tube-plate and which used ferritic
tube bundles. The first of these units, a reheater, was installed
in 1984.
      Cracking of welds between the stainless steel plates of the
superheaters and reheaters was also experienced. The problem was
caused by delayed reheat cracking. It was managed by novel repair
methods.
       Steam from the superheater enter the High Pressure turbine
(H. P. turbine) at 161.7 kg/cm2 and 516°C. Outlet steam from the H.P
turbine is reheated at 27 kg/cm2 to 538°C before entering the
                                                24




                           2 Level gauges                 2 Level gauges
                           sodium outlet side             sodium inlet side
 Hydrogen detector                                                 2 Inlet              Hydrogen
    2 Inlet                                                        side sodium          detector
    side sodium                                          Hydrogen level
    level gauges •                                       detector
Tubeptate                                                    2 Outlet side |
 assembly                                                    sodium level


                                                        2 Reaction
                              6 Sodium outle                lesonNa                    6 Sodium
       /                         ^ d i u                      side                    L / outlets
2 Outlet _                             out
side sodium                                                                              -Bellows
level gauges



                                                       2 Sodium/water
                                                       reaction nozzles




                                                                                      =8-Water
                                                                                         injection

                                                                                       pin nozzle

Water                                                                     Sodium in
Injection-&=
                                                                          REHEATER
  Tubes^
                                                        Sodium Inlets
                                                      from superheater
                     I
               Sodium in
         SUPERHEATER                                 EVAPORATOR




               Fig. 5.5.5.1. PFR steam generator heat exchangers.
                               25
Intermediate Pressure turbine (I.P.turbine). Steam from the
I.P.turbine goes directly to the Low Pressure turbine (L.P.turbi-
ne) .
      All the heat exchangers of the steam generator are
vertically mounted shell and "U"-tube units. The evaporator
employs parallel flow, while reheater and superheater operate
with counter flow. The evaporator tube and tube-plate material is
2.25% Cr, 1% Mo, niobium stabilized steel. The superheater and
reheater tube material is 316 type stainless steel

5.5.6. Sodium-Water Interactions in Steam Generators

A severe sodium-water reaction, caused by a tube rupture, results
in a pressure increase in the secondary system. This increase
will operate relief devices fitted to each unit. These devices
consist of nickel membranes, supported by hinged plates. The
pressure increase will break the membrane.
      Hydrogen detectors fitted to the sodium side of the steam
generators as seen in fig. 5.5.5.2 will at a predeterminated
level isolate both the sodium and the water/steam system from the
rest of the plant and also dump the water side. Following such an
occurrence the plant is able to restart operation on two steam
raising units at reduced power.
      It is important to detect a leak in one of the exchangers
at a very early state, because instantly after a rupture the
following chemical reaction will take place:
      a)    2Na + 2H2O -» 2NaOH + H2 (35 k.cal/mole)
      b)    2Na + H20 -» NaO + H2    (31 k.cal/mole)
      c)    2Na + H2 -* 2NaH
      The dominating reaction is a) . The reaction products of
these reactions, in particular of a) are very corrosive.
      The high pressure and temperatures produced by a Na-H,O-
reactions give rise to a pressure chock which breaks the rupture
disc after about 10 millisec, and the sodium enters the pressure
suppression line on its way to the dump tank.
      Until February 1987 steam generator tube failure tests in
large sodium rigs seemed to indicate that an initial tube failure
                                 26

would only propagate to about six neighbouring tubes during the
time it takes to stop the accident by depressurization and
dumping of the water and sodium reactants. Thus the reactor
design basis was limited to this level of a steam generator
damage.
      In February 1987 a superheater tube failure, due to tube
fretting under sodium caused by flow-induced vibrations, led to
the failure of 40 tubes, but the large safety margins enabled the
plant to survive with no other damage than the tubes themselves.
The accident led to a revision of the safety analysis, and it was
recommended to replace the tube bundles of the superheater and
reheater by an improved design.
      The figures 5.5.6.1. to 5.5.6.5 tell the story about the
repair techniques for the PFR steam generator exchangers.
      To be forewarn of such problems, acoustic monitoring
systems have been developed and shown to be effective to detect
vibration problems.


5.6. Decay Heat Removal System

The decay heat of the reactor following a shut-down is removed by
the main cooling system.
      Pony motors on the main pumps take up the drive at a about
10% of full speed to provide adequate circulation in the systems.
      The decay heat removal system proved difficult to operate
during the transient following a steam plant and turbine trip,
and the NaK systems (see section 5.7) became the operationally
preferred system for decay heat removal.


5.7. Emergency Core Cooling System


The PFR is as mentioned above a pool type fast breeder reactor.
The basic idea of the pool type reactor is that it is very
unlikely that a "Loss of Coolant Accident" should happen. There
are three reasons for this:


l)    The whole primary cooling system is submerged in the pool
        PFR EVAPORATOR REPAIR SLEEVE                                          STEAM GENERATOR
                                                                         Vessel Repair Techniques - 1987
                                                                    DEFECT FOUND -        Reheater 2 - Leaker
                                                                                          Reheater 1 • Ultrasonic Detection
                                                                                          Superheater 2 - Ultrasonic Detection
                                   _   EXPLOSIVE WELD                 PLANT STATE —       Tube Bundles removed
                                       TYPICALLY O.S"LONG
                                                                                          Vessels cleaned of sodium
                                                                                          Internal vessel access




                                                                                    I
                                                                               DEFECT FOUND                            f\
                                                                                                                   DEFECT REMOVED
                                                                                                                                    to




                                                                                                               WELD BUILT UP

           EXISTING
           STEAM TUBE        ORIGINAL WELD
           1 " O/DIA -
                                                                          BACKING PLATE

 3.5"
                             BRAZE STOP GROOVE
                                                                               INSIDE VESSEL
                             BRAZE CIRCUPS




              BRAZED JOINT                                  FINAL INSPECTION LEVEL -      Ultrasonic Examination
                 ZONE                                                                     Radiography
                                                                                          Dye penetrant lest

Fig. 5.5.6.1. Evaporator repair sleeve                       Fig. 5.5.6.2. Vessel repair 1987.
                  STEAM GENERATOR
             Vessel Repair Technique - 1988                                    VESSEL WALL
        DEFECT FOUND     -   Rehealer 1 - Leaker
                             Superheater 2 - Ultrasonic Detection
                              ( grown )

         PLANT STATE —       Tube bundles In vessel
                             No Internal access to vessel                                      NOZZLE
                             Vessels argon padded




                                  i—                        1
                             j'
                                                     3
                                                  CUTTER
                                                                                                                        to

                              ^\
                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                        NOZZLE CAP TO
                                                                                                        BE WELDED ON




                                                                                COUPON REMOVED

FINAL INSPECTION LEVEL       Full volumetric Inspection                          Defect Repair Method
                             Gamma Radiography
                             Dye penelranl test

    Fig. 5.5.6.3. Vessel repair 1988 I                              Fig. 5.5.6.4. Vessel repair 1988 II
                              29


                                                  PRESSURE GAUGE




                                                       ARGON OUTLET




                                                   GLOVE BOX

                                    ARGON INLET


                     METHOD OF COUPON REMOVAL

             Fig. 5.5.6.5. Vessel repair 1988 III

tank. Any leak in the primary system is unable to lower the
sodium level in the pool.

2)   The main pool tank is surrounded by a safety tank, which
     should guarantee that a "Loss of Coolant Accident" which
     leads to the uncovering of the core is almost impossible.

3)   The sodium circuits are not pressurized, and a temperature
     increase of almost 400°C is possible before boiling takes
     place.

The large amount of sodium present in a large pool type reactor
like PFR is arranged to provide natural circulation by convec-
tion, and the heat capacity guarantees that even without any
decay heat removal system or emerging cooling system available,
                               30

it takes many hours before the sodium temperature in the pool and
in the core approaches the boiling point of sodium.
      The PFR has four independent residual heat removal systems,
which can be divided into two groups.
      The first group involves a thermal syphon coil included in
every intermediate heat exchanger unit. These coils are part of
three independent NaK loops, releasing the residual heat to the
atmosphere via NaK/air heat exchangers, and by natural convec-
tion. The NaK loops are designed to maintain safe temperatures
within the primary circuit in the event of power supply failure.
The nominal decay heat removal of this system from the reactor is
5 MW. The heat transfer capability can be increased by operating
fans. (See fig. 5.5.1) . The freezing point of the NaK mixture
used at the PFR is about -11°C. This is quite sufficient for the
location at the Dounreay site, where temperature below 0°C is
rather infrequent.
      The second group is based on flow of atmospheric air by
natural circulation around the safety vessel. This flow will cool
the vessel before leaving the reactor vault through the annular
channel around the upper part of the tank (see fig. 5.7.1.). The
inlet channel to the vault comprises a water cooled heat ex-
changer, called the cold finger. It is not known whether the
capacity of the natural circulation air cooling system (with - or
without the cold finger) is sufficient to serve as the only
emergency core cooling system.
      Studies in the U.S.A. have shown that natural convection of
air through the spacing between reactor safety vessel and reactor
pit is sufficient to remove the decay heat from a pool type
sodium cooled fast breeder reactor.


5.8. Containment Systems


Unlike light water reactors the PFR primary circuit and the
reactor vessel does not contain hot water under high pressure.
Further in case of pump failure natural circulation of the sodium
together with the significant heat capacity of the sodium pool
and auxiliary heat removal systems will ensure adequate cooling
                                                  31




                            S«COn1»fV SOnjm WOO




      Heat
      Exchanger ( « 3 pairs )




        Fig. 5.7.1. PFR shutdown and heat removal systems

of the reactor.
      This means that the requirements of the reactor containment
are very different from and less strict than those of light water
reactors. For example any leak in the primary system will not
result in a high pressure build-up in the reactor building.
      The reactor tank with the primary cooling system, the 6
intermediate heat exchangers and most of the 3 secondary cooling
systems (including the 3 secondary cooling pumps) are placed in
the reactor building. The steam generators, one for each
secondary circuit, are placed in the steam generator building
next to, but outside the reactor building. Thus there are no high
pressure cooling system inside the reactor building.
      The PFR plant comprises 2 barriers between the core and the
surroundings. The first barrier is the reactor vessel and the
leak jacket together with the reactor roof structure with the
                               32
liquid metal seals. The second barrier is the reactor building.
      The primary containment of the reactor system consists of
the stainless steel reactor vessel which has no penetrations
below the level of the liquid sodium. It is enclosed in a close-
fitting thermally insulated outer tank, and both tanks are
suspended from the reactor roof.
      The secondary containment is the reactor building which is
designed to contain the pressure and activity release which might
result from a reactor or a fuel handling accident. The building
is a steel structure clad with concrete panels, sealed to each
other and to the frame by polysulphite. It is designed to with-
stand an internal pressure of 20" water gauge. The leak rate is
below 50% per day at 4" water gauge.
      The associated ventilation system, which in the event of an
incident automatically takes the air of the reactor hall through
a clean up plant, keeps the pressure in the building below the
external pressure. This prevents the release of unfiltered air.

5.9. Steam and Power Conversion Systems


The PFR operates with one turbine generator, comprising a high
pressure turbine, an intermediate pressure turbine and two low
pressure turbines (fig. 5.5.1).
      The turbine generator is in line with the reactor building
to avoid the danger of turbine missiles hitting it directly.
      The high pressure turbine works with superheated steam at
a pressure of 161 kg/cm and temperature of 516°C. The medium
pressure turbine works with reheated steam at 2 7.4 kg/cm2. The
pressure and temperature before the low pressure turbines are not
known.
      The generator is a 2 pole 3000 rev./min. hydrogen-water
cooled machine. It is 3 phase machine with a main voltage (phase
to phase) of 17,000 volt and a current rating of 10,000 A.


5.10. Fuel and Component Handling and Storage Systems


All refueling is performed when the reactor is shut-down. It is
                                 33
done by use of the rotating shield plug above the core and a rod-
shaped refueling machine which penetrates from the plug down into
the reactor vessel close to the top of the fuel assemblies. Fixed
to the machine by means of movable arms is a vertical chute (see
fig 5.10.1.) . By rotation of the plug and movement of the chute




                            GAMMA MONITORING THIMBLE




                                                                                      i'l




                                                               Charge machine with chute fully
                                                       retracted and at maximum radius


  Fig. 5.10.1. Reactor vessel with transfer rotor and charge
      machine.


arms the chute may be placed above any of the reactor assemblies,
and the assembly may be pulled up into the chute. Next the chute
                               34

with the assembly is moved out of the reactor area to the top of
a transfer rotor (a Lazy Susan arrangement), and the assembly is
deposited in a carrier in the rotor. The rotor is rotated to a
new position which contains a new fuel assembly. This assembly is
picked by the chute and is transfered to the reactor. The spent
fuel assembly is stored in the rotor until the decay heat has
been reduced to 15 kW. This means a storage period of about one
month for an assembly with a burn-up of about 10% of the heavy
nuclides. During the storage in the rotor the assembly is cooled
by the liquid sodium.
      It should be remembered that all handling of assemblies in
side the reactor tank is performed under liquid sodium with no
possibility of visual control. However, an under-sodium viewer
using 1 MHz ultrasonic signals have been used successfully at
PFR. A number of scans of the top of the core have been made and
excellent pictures obtained.
      After the storage period in the rotor the assembly is
transfered to the irradiated fuel cave for examination and later
transfer to the reprocessing plant. This transfer and also the
introduction of new fuel into the system is demonstrated in fig.
5.10.2. The cave is provided with a number of sodium tanks for
fuel transfer, storage, examination and disassembly under sodium.
The temperature of the sodium in these tanks is by means of
electric heating and thermostatically control kept at 100-150°C.


5.11. Safety Features

A number of safety features of the PFR has already been mentio-
ned, but a summery of these features will be presented in this
section.
      The reactor core has a negative temperature coefficient due
to the Doppler effect and thermal expansion of -0.91 cents/°C
which will counteract any divergence of the chain reaction. Also
the power coefficient is negative. A consequence of the negative
coefficients is that should all secondary circuit heat transfer
be lost and the control system fails to shut off the reactor
while the reactor is running at full power and the primary pumps
                              35




    Discharge Mask




 PFR fuel transfer route




Fig. 5.10.2. PFR fuel transfer route from fuel facility to
reactor (new fuel) and from reactor to fuel caves (spent fuel).
                                36
continue to work, the reactor will shut itself down at a primary
circuit temperature of about 600°C. If the primary power system
is lost and the control system fails to trip the reactor while
operating at full power, the reactor power will be reduced to 20%
of full power within 200 s, i.e. within the primary pump run-down
time. Further heating-up of the system will shut the reactor
down, but there may be some benign fuel pin failures in the
process.
      Loss of electric power supply to PFR will shut off the
reactor, and the primary pumps will run down. Due to the
installation of flywheels the pump speed halving time is 10s, and
the pumps will stop after about 200s. Before that the pump pony
motors which are driven from guarantied supplies, will take over.
The pony motors will maintain a pumping speed of 10%. One pump at
10% will be enough to remove the decay heat. If all pony motors
fail the sodium temperature of the core will rise as compared to
sodium temperature of the outer pool. Hereby natural circulation
will transport the decay heat from the core to the pool. From
here the heat can be transf ered to the atmosphere by means of the
decay heat rejection system. The transition from pumped flow to
natural circulation has been demonstrated through experiments
with the plant, and the decay heat was removed without the outlet
assembly temperatures exceeded normal operating levels.
      The reactor operates at a pressure only slightly above
atmospheric pressure.
      The stainless steel reactor vessel is surrounded by a leak
jacket that will prevent the sodium level from dropping below the
top of the reactor core in case of a leak in the reactor vessel.
      The large pool of sodium in which the reactor is submerged
provides a large thermal inertia. In case of a failure of the
ordinary heat removal system, three independent, continuously
operating, passive decay heat removal systems will remove the
decay heat from the reactor.
      The introduction of the secondary cooling circuit prevents
the radioactive sodium of the primary cooling circuit from
getting in contact with water/steam in case of a leak in the
steam generator.
                               37
      It has been estimated that the primary containment barrier,
the leak jacket and the roof structure, can withstand an internal
explosion of 200 MJ. It has also been estimated that the most
severe accident - all control rod dropping out of the core in
free fall due to failure of the core support structure - will
produce much less energy before the dispersal of the fuel will
make the reactor subcritical. Recriticality in connection with a
core melt-down is also considered very unlikely.
      Should radioactivity escape to the reactor hall through the
roof structure, the low leakage from the hall and the filters of
the post-accident clean-up plant will ensure that the release to
the atmosphere will be very small.

5.12. Control and Instrumentation Systems


In general the control and instrumentation systems of the PFR are
similar to those used in other nuclear power systems. The central
feature of the control and instrumentation system is an on-line
computer, supervising the operation of the plant. The control
system consists of two identical sub-systems which work together,
but either of which is able to sustain plant operation. In case
both sub-systems fail the reactor will be shut down. The system
processes about 4000 plant instrument outputs. From this input
the system can provide


      - Plant operation data, displayed on computer screens in
        the control room.

      - Control information for the two main automatic control
        loops, reactor outlet temperature controlled by movement
        of a control rod and steam pressure at the turbine stop
        valve controlled by variation of the speeds ot the
        primary and the secondary sodium pumps.


      - Records of plant performance.


      - Supervising operations such as refueling.
                                    38
5.13. Sodium Purification System
The required purity levels of the sodium of the primary circuit
and of the secondary systems are maintained by means of "cold
traps". Cold trap purification is used because some elements in
the in-core structural materials dissolve in the sodium coolant
during normal operation. The cold traps are placed in bypass
lines connected to the main sodium loops.
       In the cold traps the sodium temperature is reduced to a
minimum of 110°C. At this temperature the impurities (hydrides
and oxides) are removed by crystallisation on the packing materi-
al of the cold traps (stainless steel wire mesh). The packings
are replaced when they start to plug. A cold trap for the PFR can
accumulate about 100 kg of impurities, corresponding to a service
life of about 20 months of the packings.
       The cold trap of the primary loop is placed inside a
shielded compartment together with a 7 kg/sec pump and a rege-
nerative heat exchanger (economizer). The cold traps are a double
wall vessel, about 1.5 m in diameter and 4.9 m long. The inner
vessel is made out of 18.8.1 stainless steel and the outer vessel
out of 2.25 Cr-l Mo steel. The lower part of the outer vessel is
provided with 300 cooling fins and an air jacket on the outside.
       Air cooling reduces the temperature of the sodium from
14O°C (outlet temperature of the economizer) to about 110°C which
is the inlet temperature of the packing.
       The sodium enters at the top of the cold traps and flows
down through the annulus between the outer and the inner vessel
walls. The air cooling is applied to outside of the outer wall.
At the bottom the flow is reversed, and the sodium flows upwards
through the central channel and outwards (in radial direction)
through the wire mesh packing.
       The cold traps are designed to reduce the sodium impuriti-
es to 5-10 ppm. In a typical sodium purification system the
following elements are monitored:
           Boron, carbon, 137Cs, clorine, chromium, hydrogen, 131 I, 132 I,
133
    I, 135 I, iron, lithium, manganese, nickel, nitrogen, oxygen,
plutonium, tritium and uranium.
                                 39
5.14. Electrical Power System
The PFR plant is provided with a 300 MW generator which produces
up to 250 MWe. The electrical power is sent to Beauly near
Inverness, approximately 100 miles to the south, by use of an 275
kV overhead transmission line.


6. REFERENCES

Adams,E.R., Gregory,C.V. and Henderson,J.D.C.: The safety of the
prototype fast reactor. Nucl. Energy, Vol.31, June 1992, No.3,
185-191.

Bishop,J.F.: Power from plutonium: fast         reactor     fuel. Nucl.
Energy, Vol.20, Feb.1981, No.l, 31-48.

Bishop, J.F. and Kemp,E.F.: Fuel and fuel for PFR. Nucl. Engr.
Int. Aug. 1971, 643-645.


Brocklehurst,J.E. et al. : The performance of boron carbide
control rod pins in Prototype Fast Reactor. Nucl. Energy, Vol.23,
June 1984, No.3, 179-189.


Broomfield,A.M.: Introductory address - PFR: a retrospective.
Nucl. Energy, Vol.33, Aug.1994, No.4, 245-248.

Cambell,R.H.: Construction and engineering of PFR. Nucl. Engr.
Int. Aug.1971, 636-642.


Edmonds,E. and Higginson,P.R.: Irradiated fuel cave at Dounreay
prototype fast reactor. Nucl. Energy, Vol.19, Dec.1980, No.6,
439-447.


Evans,A.D.: PFR station control and instrumentation. Nucl. Engr.
Int. Aug.1971, 641-642.


Henry,K.J.:   Technical   description   of   PFR.   Nucl.   Engr.   Int.
                               40

Aug. 1971, 632-636.

Holloway,N.J. and Perry,A.: A PRA-based safety case for licensing
Che prototype fast reactor. International Fast Reactor Safety
Meeting. Am. Nucl. Soc. Vol. IV, 23-32.


Moore,R.V.: The Dounreay Prototype Fast Reactor. Nucl. Engr. Int.
Aug.1971, 629.


Newton,T.D.: Role of core neutronic parameter measurements in
monitoring the reactivity of the Prototype Fast Reactor at
Dounreay. Nucl. Energy, Vol.31, June 1992, No.3, 231-238.


Scott,R.W.: PFR components. Nucl. Engr. Int. Aug.1971, 646-650.


Waltar,A.E and Reynolds,A.B.: Fast breeder reactors. Pergamon
Press, 1981.

Status of liquid metal cooled fast breeder reactors. IAEA,
Vienna, 1985. Technical report series No. 246.


The Prototype Fast Reactor. Dounreay UKAEA, Nov. 1986, 10 pages.
                        Distribution of RAK-2.3 reports:

DENMARK:
                                                  Heikki Sjovall
Danish Nuclear Inspectorate                       Teollisuuden Voima Oy
attn: Louise Dahlerup                             FIN-27160Olkiluoto
      Dan Kampmann                                Finland
Datavej 16
DK-3460 Birkerod
Denmark                                           ICELAND:
Riso National Laboratory                          Tord Walderhaug
attn: Erik Nonbol (6 copies)                      Geislavarnir rikisins
      S. E. Jensen                                Laugavegur 118D
      B. Majborn                                  IS-150 Reykjavik
P.O. Box 49                                       Iceland
DK-4000 Roskilde
Denmark
                                                  NORWAY:
Kaare Ulbak
SIS
                                                  Sverre HornkjOl
Frederikssundsvej 378
                                                  Statens Stralevern
DK-2700 Bronshoj
                                                  P.O. Box 55
Denmark
                                                  N-1345 Osteras
                                                  Norway
FINLAND:                                          Geir Meyer
                                                  IFE/Halden
Prof. Heikki Kalli (2 copies)                     P.O. Box 173
Lappeenranta University of Technology             N-1751Halden
P.O. Box 20                                       Norway
FIN-53851 Lappeenranta
Finland                                           Per I Wethe
                                                  IFE/Kjeller
VTT Energy                                        P.O. Box 40
attn: Ilona Lindholm (3 copies)                   N-2007 Kjeller
      Lasse Manila                                Norway
      Risto Sairanen
      Esko Pekkarinen
P.O. Box 1604
                                                  SWEDEN:
FIN-02044 VTT
Finland
                                                  Kjell Andersson
                                                  Karinta-Konsult
Hannu Ollikkala (2 copies)
                                                  Box 6048
Finnish Centre of Radiation &
                                                  S-183 06 Taby
Nuclear Safety (STUK)
                                                  Sweden
P.O. Box 14
FIN-00881 Helsinki
                                                  Jean-Pierre Bento
Finland
                                                  KSUAB
                                                  Box 1039
Prof. Rainer Salomaa
                                                  S-61129Nyk6bing
Helsinki University of Technology
                                                  Sweden
Department of Technical Physics
FIN-02150Espoo
Finland
Statens Kärnkraftinspektion (SKI)      Magnus Kjellander
attn: Wiktor Fried (3 copies)          KSUAB
       Oddbjörn Sandervâg              Box 1039
       Lennart Carlsson                S-61129Nyköbing
       Christer Viktorsson             Sweden
S-10658 Stockholm
Sweden                                 Petra Lundström
                                       IVO International Oy
Prof. Jan-Olof Liljenzin               FIN-01019 IVI
Chalmers Tekniska Högskola             Finland
S-41296 Göteborg
Sweden                                 Gustav Löwenhielm
                                       FKA
Studsvik EcoSafe AB                    Forsmarks Kraftgrupp AB
attn: Lars Nilsson (2 copies)          S-742 03 östhammar
       Lennart Devell                  Sweden
S-61182Nyköbing
Sweden                                 Lasse Reiman
                                       Finnish Centre of Radiation &
Royal Institute of Technology          Nuclear Safety (STUK)
attn: Prof. Bai Raj Sehgal             P.O. Box 14
       Prof. Jan Blomstrand            FIN-00881 Helsinki
       Dr. Ingemar Tiren               Finland
Brinellvägen 60
S-10044 Stockholm                      Egil Stokke
Sweden                                 IFE/Halden
                                       P.O. Box 173
Statens Strâlsakerhetsinstitut (SSI)   N-1751 Halden
attn: Jan Olof Snihs (2 copies)        Norway
       Jack Valentin
S-17116 Stockholm                      Jan-Anders Svensson
Sweden                                 Barsebäck Kraft AB
                                       Box 524
Yngve Waaranperä                       S-246 25 Löddeköpinge
ABB Atom AB                            Sweden
S-72163 Vesterâs
Sweden                                 Björn Wahlström
                                       VTT Automation
                                       P.O. Box 13002
REFERENCE GROUP FOR THE RAK            FIN-02044 VTT
PROGRAMME;                             Finland

Björn Thorlaksen                       Povl L. Olgaard (3 copies)
Danish Nuclear Inspectorate            Riso National Laboratory
Datavej 16                             P.O. Box 49
DK-3460 Birkerod                       DK-4000 Roskilde
Denmark                                Denmark

Markku Friberg
Industriens Kraft TVO                  EXECUTIVE SECRETARY:
FIN-27160 Olkiluoto
Finland                                Torkel Bennerstedt
                                       NKS
Gert Hedner                            PL 2336
Statens Kärnkraftinspektion (SKI)      S-76010Bergshamra
S-10658 Stockholm                      Sweden
Sweden
