                                                            Corrosion Science, Vol. 36, No. 4, pp. 593~10, 1994
~ )       Pergamon                                                                        Elsevier Science Ltd
                                                                                      Printed in Great Britain.
                                                                                     oo10-938x/94 $6.(~1+ o.oo


                                        0010-938X(93)E0008-F


  THE LIQUID METAL EMBR1TTLEMENT                                               OF 9Cr STEEL
 IN S O D I U M E N V I R O N M E N T S AND THE                               ROLE OF NON-
                      METALLIC IMPURITIES

             P. SKELDON,* J. P. H I L D I T C H , t J. R. HURLEY'l" and D. R. TICEt

         *Corrosion and Protection Centre, UMIST, PO Box 88, Manchester M60 1QD, U.K.
                      t A E A Technology, Risley, Warrington WA3 6AT, U.K.


Abstract--Liquid metal embrittlement (LME) of 9Cr steel has been studied in sodium environments, to
which 0-50 w/o NaOH was added, at temperatures between 150 and 525°C. LME occurred under dynamic
straining with increasing severity from 150-450°C by a quasi-cleavage mode of fracture. At a slightly
higher temperature, which depended on strain rate, there was a transition in behaviour and LME did not
occur. The steel was resistant to LME under constant load except at temperatures below the transition
temperature when stresses were high enough to cause significant creep. LME could be greatly reduced, or
eliminated, either by cold-trapping or hot-trapping the sodium; thus it is inferred that a non-metallic
impurity species is involved in the cracking mechanism. For environmental conditions typical of sodium-
cooled nuclear plants, the occurrence of LME only in the post-UTS region of the stress-strain curve, i.e. in
the region of non-uniform elongation and approach to failure, indicates that it is not directly relevant to
plant design.


                                          INTRODUCTION
LIQUID metal embrittlement (LME) is a subject that has attracted the attention of
research workers for many years, although it has been studied less than other forms
of environmentallyinduced embrittlement. It is also apparent that certain metals can
induce cracking at temperatures lower than their melting points and that LME is an
aspect of the broader phenomenon of metal-induced embrittlement (MIE). Several
reviews of MIE are available to which the reader is referred for discussions of the
mechanistic models that have been proposed to explain its occurrence. 1-3
    While a number of systematic studies have been carried out examining the role of
environmental composition on LME, these have largely addressed the effects of
alloying additions to the embrittling metal. 4'5 The authors are unaware of any
detailed studies of the effects of non-metallic contaminants although many liquid
metals are reactive towards covering atmospheres. It has, however, been noted that
the presence of oxygen may inhibit wetting of specimens by liquid metal environ-
ments thereby affecting susceptibility to LME, and that LME may be facilitated by
preparing environments under vacuum. 6,7
    In the present work, an examination has been made of the influence of non-
metallic contaminants on LME of 9Cr steel by sodium using cold-trapping and hot-
trapping to reduce the concentrations of non-metallic species. Such steel is of interest
in the nuclear industry for the construction of steam generators of sodium-cooled fast
reactors. From the results it is inferred that a non-metallic species is essential for
embrittlement to occur, i.e. that high purity sodium does not cause LME of the steel.
   Manuscript received 27 September 1993.

                                                    593
594                                             P. SKELDONet al.




                                                                 t
                                                                 __ _.__i12.5

                                     1.0




                                                                           A




                                                   14.0
          FIG. 1.     Tensile specimen with dimensions in mm; standard specimen A = 27 mm; modi-
                                           fied specimen A = 165 mm.


                                      EXPERIMENTAL               METHOD
Materials and specimens
    A niobium- and vanadium-strengthened 9Cr steel (ASME SA 213 Grade T91, subsequently referred
to in this paper as 9Cr steel) was obtained as tubing of 16 mm OD and 2 mm wall thickness, that had been
normalized at 1050°C and tempered at 780°C for 1 h, from which standard and modified tensile specimens
were manufactured (see Fig. 1). The modified specimens were used to pre-treat the sodium by cold-
trapping as described in the following section. 9Cr steel adaptors were welded to the top and bottom of
each specimen to contain the test environment within the bore and to make connections to pull-bars for
tensile testing. During welding, the gauge lengths were surrounded by a water-cooled copper coil to keep
their temperature below 300°C. A hole penetrated the top adaptor (which could later be closed by welding
a lid to the adaptor), to allow filling of the specimens with the test environments. Details of the
composition of the steel are given in Table i.

Test environments
    Untreated. The test environments comprised high purity sodium [with respect to metallic contaminants
(Table 2)], and Na-NaOH mixtures prepared with analytical grade NaOH. High purity argon was used for
control tests (<0.4 vpm 02, <1 vpm H20 ). Specimens and environments were prepared in a glovebox
under a high purity argon atmosphere. The glovebox was equipped with rotary and diffusion pumps and
could be evacuated to <0.1 Pa before being filled with argon. Sodium was fed directly into the glovebox, at
a temperature of ~ 150°C, from a stainless steel storage system containing about 201 of sodium.
    The Na-NaOH environments were formed either by directly adding the components to the specimen


                                   TABLE 1.   COMPOSITIONOF 9Cr STEEL (W/O)

      C         Cr         Mn       Mo        Ni          Nb       N       P       Si       S        V

  0.096         8.6        0.42     0.96      0.25        0.08    0.031   0.005   0.28    0.012     0.22
                                           Liquid metal embrittlement of 9Cr steel                                                      595

                                        TABLE 2.       COMPOSITION OF SODIUM (ug g 1)

                                                                   AI, Ba, Ca, Cd, Cr, Co, Cu, Li,
                               K        C1       Fe        Sn       Mg, Ni, P, Pb, Si, Sr, V, Zn

                              104       17        6       <10                          <5



or by mixing the components at 400°C for 48 h in a sealed stainless steel capsule. The capsule was then
opened in a glovebox and the contents stored under argon, in a stainless steel vessel, for later use. No
significant difference was found between tests using environments prepared by the two methods. The
sealing of capsules and specimens was carried out using welding facilities within the glovebox.

    Pre-treated. Non-metallic contaminants in the sodium, derived from (i) the contamination in the
sodium supply, (ii) the glovebox atmosphere and (iii) oxide/hydroxide films and adsorbed moisture on
specimens, were controlled by either hot- or cold-trapping. Removal of non-metallic contaminants by hot-
trapping involved heating a standard specimen containing zirconium foil and sodium in an argon-filled
stainless steel capsule at 650°C for 72 h. Non-metallic contaminant removal by cold-trapping was effected
by cooling the lower end of a modified tensile specimen for 48 h prior to a tensile test, while the gauge
length was maintained at 400°C, to precipitate impurities that were in excess of their solubility at the
lowest temperature (the saturation temperature).

Tensile tests and post-test examination
    Specimens were tested either at a constant load or at a slow strain rate using 100 kN Mayes and
Schenck servo-electric test machines, in force or displacement control, respectively. The latter tests,
unless otherwise stated, were carried out at a nominal strain rate of 10-~' s-~ . The specimens were
contained in leak-tight, flexible, stainless steel test sections through which argon flowed (Fig. 2). Test
temperatures, which were measured by thermocouples attached to the gauge lengths, were in the range
150-525°C. The modified specimens were contained in a similar, but longer, test section, which was cooled
at one end to establish a temperature gradient for cold-trapping. Thermocouples were also attached to the
ends of the specimens to measure the cold-point temperature. After testing the specimens were
decontaminated using methylated spirits, washed in demineralized water, rinsed in acetone and then
dried. They were then examined using an Hitachi $520 scanning electron microscope.

Determination of the oxygen content of untreated sodium
    The oxygen content in the untreated sodium was measured using the distillation technique8 for one
specimen following a slow strain rate test at 400°C. Immediately after fracture, the test section was
transferred to a glovebox and the specimen removed under a high purity argon atmosphere. The lower
half of the specimen, containing sodium, was placed in a hydrogen-fired nickel crucible which was then
sealed in a stainless steel distillation pot. The distillation pot was removed from the glovebox and
connected to a distillation rig. The sodium was vacuum distilled at 350°C for 8 h and collected on a water-
cooled cold finger. The oxygen content of the sodium was inferred from the alkalinity of washings of the
nickel crucible and the specimen, which was determined by titration, and the weight of the sodium.
Analytical facilities were not available for measuring the hydrogen concentration in the sodium.

                                              EXPERIMENTAL                   RESULTS
        The influence of the environmental composition on susceptibility to LME at
400°C was studied in slow strain rate tests using sodium containing 0-50 w/o NaOH.
T h e s u s c e p t i b i l i t y t o L M E w a s a s s e s s e d b y c o m p a r i n g t h e e l o n g a t i o n a t f a i l u r e , el,
w i t h t h a t o f a c o n t r o l s p e c i m e n t e s t e d i n a r g o n , elc, i.e. el/elc x 100. T h e e l o n g a t i o n s
of the specimens were about 50% lower than that of a control specimen, and
i n d e p e n d e n t o f t h e a m o u n t o f N a O H ( F i g . 3). C r a c k s w e r e r e a d i l y o b s e r v a b l e
around the fracture surface of the specimens running on planes normal to the applied
s t r e s s , i n d i c a t i n g t h a t t h e loss o f e l o n g a t i o n w a s a s s o c i a t e d w i t h L M E o f t h e s t e e l .
E l s e w h e r e t h e f r a c t u r e s u r f a c e e x h i b i t e d s h e a r lips a n d m i c r o v o i d c o a l e s c e n c e t h a t
596                                    P. SKF.LDONet al.



                                                                LOAO



                    putt bar                                      argon outlet

                                                                                         gasket seat
                argon inlet




       specimen end p l u g / ado                                 welded Lid

                      seat weld                                   filler     hole


                                                                           enw ronment

                                                                           tensile    specimen

                                                                           flexible     bellows



      specimen end plug I adaptor                                 seat weld


                                                                   7            _ rotatable       flange


                                                                                      f~xed flange

        gland and olive
        penetration


                  thermocouple


                                                                 LOAD


                                      FIG. 2.   Test section.


 are characteristic of a normal ductile fracture of the steel. The stress-strain curves for
 specimens tested in the control and sodium environments were practically coincident
 until shortly before fracture of the specimen (Fig. 4). The fractures occurred at
 stresses close to the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) of the control specimens.
     Further tests to investigate the effect of t e m p e r a t u r e on L M E utilized an
 environment p r e p a r e d with 5 w/o N a O H . As discussed later, the solubility of N a O H
 in sodium at low t e m p e r a t u r e s is limited, so not all of the N a O H would have gone
 into solution. The elongation of the steel at a strain rate of 10 -6 s -1 diminished
 steadily with an increase in t e m p e r a t u r e between 150 and 450°C (Fig. 5). (A check
 was m a d e that the observed effect was not due to an increased ease of wetting at
 higher t e m p e r a t u r e s by first exposing a specimen to the environment at 400°C for
 24 h before testing it at 150°C. The specimen behaved in the same m a n n e r as one
                                Liquid metal embrittlement of 9Cr steel                                        597


                       70




                       60



                                X

                       50


                  8

                  E
                  o

                  uJ




                       30




                       20              l           I                           I            I       I

                            O         10          20                           30          ~0       50
                                                   NtlOH (w/0)

FIG. 3.       The results of slow strain rate tests (el~el c × 100), at 10 6 S 1 of 9Cr steel in
                         sodium, containing up to 50 w/o N a O H , at 400°C.




    600 -
                                                       \\




   ~6
    [3-




    -4-                                                      I
                                                             t            .pollufed        sodium

                                                                      I
                                                                     I
                                                                 I



                                                                          I
                                                                           I
          0
              0                            o'.1                                     o'.2                 o.~
                                                       St-rain

FIG. 4.       Typical stress-strain curves for slow strain rate tests, at 10-6 s-I , of 9Cr steel in
                  sodium, containing up to 50 w/o NaOH, and in argon, at 400°C.
598                                              P. S~ELDON et al.

             100


             90
                                                                                                                  X




             80                             ""   X




                                                        \

             70                                                 \
                                                                    \

                                                                        X
             60                                                         X\
                                                                             \
                                                                                 \
                                                                                     \
                                                                                         \
             50
       =.,                                                                                        \
                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                          \



      lad


              3O


             20


             10


                             I        I          !          I           I                     I               I        I    I

                   100               ZOO                300                                  t, O0                    500

                                                 Temperoture                (*C)

      Fin. 5.      The results of slow strain rate tests (el~el c × 100), at l0 -6 s 1, of 9Cr steel in
                               sodium, containing 5 w/o N a O H , at 150-525°C.



which had not been pre-exposed.) There followed a sharp transition in behaviour
between 450 and 475°C, with the elongation recovering in this temperature range. A
series of additional tests was carried out to examine whether this strongly
temperature-dependent behaviour was influenced by strain rate. On increase of the
strain rate to 10 -5 s -1 the transition was displaced to a temperature about 25°C
higher (Fig. 6). Below the transition temperature, at 400°C, the elongation de-
creased progressively with reduction of strain rate from 10 .5 to 10 . 7 s -1.
    Cracks were observed in all the tests in sodium containing 5 w/o N a O H that were
carried out at temperatures below the transition temperature. The reduced
elongations of the steel caused by LME could be correlated with the area of cracking
on the fracture surface (Fig. 7). At temperatures ~<250°C the cracks were shallow,
and specimens fractured in the post-UTS region of the stress-strain curve, but at
higher temperatures the cracks were deeper and at 400 and 450°C the wall thickness
of the gauge length was penetrated. At the latter temperature, the cracks occupied
virtually the whole of the fracture surface and fractures occurred in the pre-UTS
portion of the stress-strain curve. No cracks were found on specimens tested at
                                   Liquid metal embrittlement of 9Cr steel                                                             599


                100


                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                         /

                                                                                                                     I
                90
                                                                                                                it



                                                                                                            I
                                                                                                        I
                80
                                                                                                    I

                                                                                                '               10 "s s- I
                                                                                            I

                                                                                        I
                70
         A
                                                                                    /
                                                                                /
                                                                            /
                                                                        /
                                                              -Ig~
                60
          tJ
          ==
          o
                                                           10"6 s - I
                50




                l.O




                30             10-7 s-1

                           l               I        i            I                                          I                     I


                         t~O0             ~25      t,SO       t,75                              500                              SZS

                                                Temperature    (*C}

      Flo. 6.   The results of slow strain rate tests (el/el~ × 100) of 9Cr steel in sodium, containing
                              5 w/o NaOH, at strain rates of 10-7-10 5 s-l.


temperatures above the transition temperature. The cracks produced at tempera-
tures below the transition temperature were transgranular and had the typical
appearance of quasi-cleavage; they had a finer, more brittle appearance at lower
temperatures (Fig. 8). At 150°C intragranular secondary cracks were also present.
The cracks s o m e t i m e s initiated at stress-raising defects on the bore surface which
remained from tube manufacture (Fig. 9), but on other occasions no initiating
feature was discernible. Examination of specimens tested in other sodium environ-
ments showed that the fractography was independent of the N a O H content of the
environment.
    The crack growth rate at 400°C was estimated from the depth of the deepest crack
and the time period following separation of the stress-strain curves recorded for the
control and the test environments, which was assumed to correspond to the time of
crack growth. The results showed that the crack growth rate increased with increase
in the applied strain rate from about 1 0 - S m s -1 at an applied strain rate of 10 -7 s -
to about 1 0 - 6 m s -a at an applied strain rate of 10 -5 s -1.
    A series of additional tests was conducted at 400°C in which hot- and cold-
600                                 P. SKELDONet al.

trapping of the sodium was carried out in order to lower the concentration of non-
metallic impurities. Both methods of purifying the sodium resulted in the elongation
of the steel recovering at 400°C (Fig. 10). Cold-trapping became more effective in
reducing the susceptibility of the steel to L M E as the saturation temperature was
reduced and accordingly as the solubility of non-metallic impurities was decreased.
The cold-trapped sodium still caused very shallow cracking at the lowest saturation
temperature employed, but the extent of cracking was greatly reduced compared
with that in untreated sodium. Identical behaviour could be obtained using sodium
sampled from a corrosion loop operating at 550°C, which had been cold-trapped at
150°C for 10,000 h. In this case the only significant contamination in the sodium
during tensile tests arose from residual moisture in the glovebox and any films on the
specimen. Therefore it is unlikely that any other types of species, e.g. a metallic
impurity, rather than a non-metallic species, was implicated in the LME. Hot-
trapping led to a small increase in elongation compared with the control specimen,
probably due to the additional tempering during the hot-trapping treatment, and no
cracks due to L M E were observed on the fracture surface or along the gauge length.
A specimen subjected to an identical thermal treatment as in hot-trapping but
subsequently filled with untreated sodium suffered similar L M E as the normal alloy,
indicating that microstructural changes in the steel during the hot-trapping treatment
were of no consequence to the elimination of LME.
    The results of constant load tests in sodium to which 5 w/o N a O H was added are
shown in Fig. 11. L M E only occurred at temperatures below the transition when the
stresses were high enough to cause average creep rates of - 5 × 10 -7 S-1. At lower
temperatures and lower stresses, when the average creep rates were < 2 × 10-8 s-1,
or at a temperature above the transition, cracks did not initiate, at least within the
test durations, which was normally 100 h except for one test at 400°C which was
continued for 500 h.

                                   DISCUSSION
    The behaviour of 9Cr steel in liquid sodium environments, observed in the
present work, was similar in several respects to L M E of low alloy steels in other
liquidmetal environments. Thus, the susceptibilityto cracking was dependent on the
temperature of the sodium and sensitive to the applied strain rate and the mode of
loading, and there was a sharp transitionfrom low ductilityto ductile behaviour at
high temperature. 3 It appears that cracking in sodium requires the agency of
non-metallic impurities since itcan be reduced in severityor eliminated by lowering
the non-metallic impurity concentration in the sodium by either cold- or hot-
trapping.
    The principal non-metallic impurities of importance to materials performance in
liquid sodium are carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Their solubilitiesin sodium which
depend exponentially on temperature, have been determined by a number of
investigators. For the present purposes reference is made to the solubility ex-
pressions of Thorley and Hobdell for carbon, 9 of Whittingham for hydrogen, I° and
of Thorley for oxygcn.ll Carbon can be discounted as a factorin L M E because ithas
an extremely low solubilityin the temperature range of current interest,for instance
the value deduced at 150°C from higher temperature solubilitymeasurements isonly
_10-6 ~g g-1.9 In contrast, hydrogen and oxygen have appreciable solubilitiesin
liquid sodium, which arc broadly similar at low temperatures when expressed in
                                                (b)                                     1ram




FIG. 7. Views of fracture surfaces of 9Cr steel tested, at 10 -6 s - l , in sodium containing 5
w/o NaOH. (a) Typical fracture above the transition temperature. (b) Top view of fractured
spccimen tested at 475°C--no quasi-cleavage. (c) Top view of fractured specimen tested at
400°C---30% quasi-cleavage. (d) Top view of fractured specimen tested at 450°C-
                                -100% quasi-cleavage.




                                             601
FIG. 8. Examples of quasi-cleavage on 9Cr steel tested, at 10-6 s-l, in sodium containing 5
w/o NaOH (arrows indicate the direction of crack growth): (a) 150°C; (b) 250°C; (c) 400°C;
                                       (d) 450°C.




                                            602
FIG. 9.   Crack initiation sites on 9Cr steel tested, at 10-6 s-1 , in sodium containing 5 w/o
             N a O H : (a) At 'score' marks left from tube drawing; (b) at a 'pit'.




                                            603
                                      Liquid metal embrittlement of 9Cr steel                                 605

                   120
                                  _       x

                   110

                                                      x
                   100


                   90


           ~       80
           °
            c:
            0
           .....   70
            "
            CI
            c:
            0
           .... 60
           ~




                                      x    cold trapped
                    50
                                      o hot trapped                                   x
                                                                                      •
                                                                                      •
                   40


                   30
                         0                100             200         300             400            500
                                                Saturation Temperature I O( )

      FIG. 10.      The results of slow strain rate tests (elJelc x 1(0), at 10- 6 S-I, of9Cr in sodium, at
                                 400"C, following either hot- or cold-trapping.



atomic concentrations. 1O · 11 They probably exist as H- and 0 2- ions solvated by Na+
ions. When these ions are present together OH- is formed by the equilibrium
reaction: 12
                                                                                                              (1)
    Between 3000 e and 500o e, about 5-15% of the total amount of oxygen in sodium
is associated with OH- when the hydrogen concentration is 1 j.1g g-I.13 The addition
of NaOH to the sodium supplements the existing H- and 0 2- concentrations by
reacting according to: 14,15
                                                                                                              (2)
and
                                      2Na + NaOH ~ Na20 + NaH.                                                (3)
    However, the addition of NaOH to untreated sodium can only affect the
concentration of the principal dissolved non-metallic impurities at temperatures
above the saturation temperatures for H- and 0 2- of the untreated sodium. These
saturation temperatures were estimated for the untreated sodium, assuming the
606                                          P. SKELDON et al.


                         600



                                                   \          •
                         550           0               \      •
                                                           ,
                                       0
                                                             ,
                                                              .....

                         500                                 d'"

                                       0

                                                                            c
                         450                                                0
                                                                            +­
                  "
                 0..                                                        Vl   <11
                                                                                 en
                 :l:                                                        C
                                                                            a ac
                                                                            L
                                                                            +­
                  .
                                                                                 L
                  '"'"   400
                  ....
                 ....
                 VI




                         350



                         300                                                                 o



                         250;------,,------,------+------+------,
                               300     350         400                450              500       550

                                               Temperature (.( I
      FIG. 11. The results of constant load tests of 9Cr steel in sodium containing 5 wlo NaOH.
      (Tests of unfailed specimens stopped at 100 h, except *500 h; solid circles indicate fracture.)


worst-case possible contamination of the sodium from the glovebox atmosphere and
adsorbed moisture and passive films on the specimens, to be 280°C and 400°C for
hydrogen and oxygen, respectively. The latter was consistent with a value of 335°C
deduced from the oxygen concentration in sodium of 150l1g g-], that had been
measured for one specimen tested at 400°C, by the distillation technique. 8 Since less
than 1 w/o NaOH provides sufficient hydrogen and oxygen to saturate the sodium
with both H- and 0 2 - at 400°C the sodium environments that were formed at 400°C,
by addition of 1-50 w/o NaOH, were essentially invariant, i.e. saturated with both
H- and 0 2 -. This explains the similar effects of the environments on LME of the
steel. The susceptibility of the steel to LME in deliberately contaminated environ­
ments was also practically the same as that in untreated sodium, indicating that
sufficient non-metallic impurities were already available in the untreated sodium and
that further increases in their concentrations through additions of NaOH were
unimportant.
    Cold-trapping and hot-trapping the untreated sodium, both of which are effective
means ofreducing the H- and 0 2 - concentrations in liquid sodium, ]6,17 decreased
the susceptibility of the steel to LME. The results suggested that the threshold
                           Liquid metal embrittlement of 9Cr steel                    607

concentrations of non-metallic impurities in sodium for initiating LME are similar at
150 and 400°C, i.e. ~0.2.ug g-I of hydrogen or ~8.ug g-I of oxygen at 150°C, and
~0.6.ugg-1 of hydrogen or ~15.ugg-1 of oxygen at 400°C. (These values were
derived from the solubilities of hydrogen and oxygen in the isothermal test in sodium
containing 5 wlo NaOH at 150°C, and from the cold-trapping experiment at a
saturation temperature of 180°C.) Note, however, that the activities of the impurities
at these threshold concentrations are higher at the lower temperature. The concen­
tration of hydrogen in the sodium following hot-trapping was not determined, but
would certainly have been less than these threshold levels; while in the authors'
experience this treatment reduces the oxygen concentration in sodium below the
limit of detectability by the distillation technique, i.e. < l.ug g-I.
    The effect of temperature on the susceptibility to LME in sodium, to which 5 wlo
NaOH had been added prior to testing, can be related to the increase in the solubility
of non-metallic impurities with increase in the sodium temperature and the acceler­
ation of thermally driven processes in the LME mechanism. The latter presumably
includes the supply of non-metallic impurities to the crack tip by diffusion and
possibly the diffusion away from the crack tip of reaction products, which may well
control the crack growth rate. The crack growth rate increased with the applied strain
rate, possibly partly due to the higher stresses during crack growth at the faster strain
rates because of the greater crack initiation strains. The sharp transition in behav­
iour, that occured at ~450°C, was coincident with the onset of stress relaxation
during the slow strain rate tests, which was evident by a reduction in work hardening
to a relatively low level above the transition temperature. Testing at a higher strain
rate diminished the effect of stress relaxation and hence caused the transiton to occur
at a higher temperature. Further, in the vicinity of the transition temperature, the
tensile strength of the steel was declining relatively rapidly such that a critical stress
level for LME may not have been attainable above the transition temperature.
    The condition of the steel surface following exposure to the sodium environments
was not examined in detail. At lower temperatures the steel emerged with a very
bright metallic appearance, but at the highest temperature, it appeared matt grey
due to corrosion of the surface. No significant studies have been reported of the
corrosion of steels by sodium at low temperatures, relevant to the temperature range
of LME of 9Cr steel, primarily because it has not been of any great technological
interest. However, it is clear from the results of corrosion tests in flowing sodium at
higher temperature that the corrosion rates must be exceedingly low over much of
the temperature range of current concern. If!
    During the initial stages of exposure, liquid sodium would have reduced the pre­
existing passive film on the steel. Thereafter, sodium chromite, a relatively insoluble
phase, and soluble iron species would form by reaction of the steel with the oxygen
and sodium. 19.20 Sodium ferrate films are not expected to form under the current test
conditions,21 although some doubts have been expressed about the reliability of the
thermodynamic data. 22 It seems unlikely that a continuous layer of sodium chromite
would develop, particularly at low temperature, because of the low concentration of
chromium in the alloy.23 Non-metallic species in the sodium could be chemisorbed
on exposed areas of the steel surface, possibly forming a dipolar layer with sodium.
Structured layers of Na-O have been reported on transition metals in other
contexts. 24 If the relevant non-metallic species was oxygen, such a layer may be a
pre-cursor to iron corrosion which is thought to occur via a soluble Fe-O-Na
608                                P. SKELDON et al.

complex. 2o Certainly sodium chromite is not essential to LME since in unpublished
work the authors have shown that cracking of both lower chromium and chromium­
free steels can also occur in impure sodium environments. The subsequent possible
effects of adsorption/chemisorption processes in LME have been well-discussed in
the literature with respect to both enhanced shear and decohesion models. 1-3.25
    Since the corrosion of iron is thermally activated and dependent on the concen­
tration of oxygen in sodium 18 it is possible that crack growth may occur by a
dissolution mechanism. The corrosion rates on unstrained ferrous alloys are far too
low to account for the observed crack growth rates, however, and therefore
dissolution would have to be accelerated at the crack tip possibly by mechanisms
analogous to those proposed by Galvele for stress corrosion 26 and by Robertson for
LME.27 Time-dependent processes appear to be involved in crack initiation since the
fracture strain in sodium environments was found to decrease with decrease in the
strain rate and hence increasing test duration. This suggests that a chemical step may
be important to crack initiation. One possibility may be preferential corrosion by the
sodium at lath boundary carbides of the tempered martensite which produces fine
fissures. This would result in local stress enhancement and assist crack initiation as
evident by the observed initiation at tube defects. However, carbides do not seem to
be essential to crack growth since in a lower alloy steel, in which the crack path was
both intergranular and transgranular, the crack propagated through low carbon
ferrite grains by cleavage.
    The main finding of the present work is that LME can be eliminated or reduced in
sodium by cold- or hot-trapping, indicating that non-metallic impurities are essential
to LME of steel in liquid sodium. The nature of the experiments precludes
identifying any particular mechanism of LME, or uneq uivocally confirming a role for
a particular non-metallic impurity. While the embrittling non-metallic species has
not been uniquely identified, the weight of evidence possibly favours oxygen rather
than hydrogen. Oxygen is well-established as an important factor in the corrosion of
ferrous alloys by liquid sodium and assists their wetting; such processes are promoted
by an increase in temperature. In contrast, the usual hydrogen embrittlement
mechanisms cause greatest susceptibility to cracking at lower temperatures. 28
Another factor of note relevant to the preparation of the environment is the
relatively high equilibrium partial pressure of hydrogen above H- saturated sodium,
compared with the equilibrium partial pressure of oxygen above 0 2- saturated
sodium, which favours retention of oxygen rather than hydrogen by the sodium as a
result of the reaction with residual moisture in the glovebox atmosphere according
to:
                                                                                   (4)
    At low temperatures, of about 150°C, at which sodium environments were
poured into specimens, the equilibrium partial pressures of hydrogen and oxygen are
-2 x 10- 6 atm and -3 x 10- 89 atm and the hydrogen and oxygen solubilities are 0.2
and 8.ugg-1Y,JO Thus, oxygen will be retained by the sodium, in solution and as
Na20, while NaH will only precipitate when sufficient hydrogen has been generated
to reach the saturation partial pressure of hydrogen. If it is assumed that most of the
oxygen in the sodium is derived from moisture, the equivalent amount of hydrogen
generated can be calculated. Thus, for a measured oxygen concentration of
150 .ug g -1 the hydrogen generated could only have increased the partial pressure of
                              Liquid metal embrittlement of 9Cr steel                            609

hydrogen in the glove box by ~2 x 10- 6 atm, i.e. similar to the equilibrium partial
pressure for NaH precipitation at 150°C. Therefore it is probable that the H­
concentration in the sodium was actually < 1 ,ug g -1. If hydrogen was the active
species, cold-trapping would only have been effective at temperatures below the
corresponding saturation temperature, i.e. <195°C, which was not the case.
    The results of the current work are the first conclusive evidence of LME of steel
by liquid sodium (although 9Cr steel has been found to suffer LME in liquid
lithium)?9 The successful use, over many years, of low alloy steels in the nuclear
industry for containing sodium can be explained by the care exercised in the control
of environmental purity, normally by cold-trapping the sodium, which prevents
injurious concentrations of impurities arising, and the avoidance of the combination
of very high stresses and dynamic straining that appear to be necessary to initiate
LME. Typically, saturation temperatures of sodium in nuclear plants are maintained
at ~150°C, corresponding to relatively low concentrations of non-metallic impuri­
ties. The present experimental results for these conditions indicate LME only occurs
under the severe loading conditions of slow strain rate tests, i.e. in the post-UTS
region of the stress-strain curve at the approach to the control failure strain, which
are not relevant to plant design.

                                        CONCLUSIONS
    1. Under conditions of dynamic straining, 9Cr steel is susceptible to liquid metal
embrittlement in liquid sodium that is contaminated by non-metallic impurities.
Cracks are transgranular and have the characteristics of quasi-cleavage. For environ­
mental purities typical of sodium-cooled nuclear plants, embrittlement only occurs
under the severe loading conditions of slow strain rate tests, i.e. in the post-UTS
region of the stress-strain curve at the approach to the control failure strain, which
are not relevant to the plant design.
    2. The susceptibility to embrittlement increases with increase of temperature
between 150 and 450°C. Above this range there is a sharp transition in behaviour and
LME does not occur. The temperature for this transition moves to a slightly higher
temperature with increase of strain rate; the transition is coincident with the onset of
stress relaxation during testing.
    3. The susceptibility to embrittlement can be eliminated or reduced by cold- or
hot-trapping indicating that embrittlement is entirely dependent on the presence of
non-metallic impurities.

Acknowledgement-The work was funded by the U.K. Department of Trade and Industry as part of the
European Fast Reactor Collaborative Research and Development Programme.

                                         REFERENCES
 1. S. P. LYNCH, Mater. Characterization 28,279 (1992).
 2. C. F. OLD, Metal Sci. Aug, 433 (1980).
 3. N. S. STOLOFF, Environment-induced Cracking of Metals, p. 31. NACE, Wisconsin (1988).
 4. M. W. MUCEK and N. N. BREYER, Embrittlement by Liquid and Solid Metals (ed. M. H. KAMDAR), p.
    133. The Metallurgical Society of AIME (1982).
 5. M. H. KAMDAR (ed.), Embrittlement by Liquid and Solid Metals, p. 149. The Metallurgical Society of
    AIME (1982).
 6. D. N. FAGER and W. F. SPURR, Corrosion 26,409 (1970).
 7. I. G. DMUKHOVSKAYA and U. U. POPOVICH, Fiz. Khim. Mekh. Mater. 15,64 (1979).
 8. J. A. J. WALKER, E. D. FRANCE and W. T. EDWARDS, Analysis 90, 727 (1965).
610                                        P. SKELDON et al.

 9. A. W. THORLEY and M. R. HOBDELL, IAEA Int. Working Group on Fast Reactors, Specialists
    Meeting, Harwell, U.K. (1979).
10. A. C. WHImNGHAM, J. Nuclear Mater. 60, 119 (1976).
11. A. W. THORLEY, UKAEA NRL-R-1043(R) (1989).
12. P. HUBBERSLEY, P. F. ADAMS, R. J. PULMAN, M. G. DOWN and A. E. THUNDER, J. Less Common
    Metals 49, 253 (1976).
13. C. A. SMITH and A. C. WHITTINGHAM, Materials Behaviour and Physical Chemistry in Liquid Metal
    Systems (ed. H. U. BORGSTEDT), p. 365. Plenum Press, Karlsruhe (1981).
14. A. C. WHImNGHAM, C. A. SMITH, P. A. SIMM and R. J. SMITH, Second Int. Conf. on Liquid Metals in
    Energy Production, Session 16, p. 38. Richland, Washington (1980).
15. C. F. KNIGHTS and A. C. WHITTINGHAM, Materials Behaviour and Physical Chemistry in Liquid Metal
    Systems (ed. H. U. BORGSTEDT), p. 287. Plenum Press, Karlsruhe (1981).
16. A. W. THORLEY and A. C. RAINE, Int. Symp. on the Alkali Metals, Special Publication No. 22, p. 374.
    The Chemical Society (1967).
17. W. HAUBOLD, J. JUNG, K-L. SCHILLINGS, Second Int. Conf. on Liquid Metal Technology in Energy
    Production, Session 15, p. 1. Richland, Washington (1980).
18. A. W. THORLEY and C. TYZACK, IAEA Conf. on Alkali Metal Coolants, Vienna, p. 97 (1967).
19. I. W. CAVELL and M. G. NICHOLAS, J. Nuclear Mater. 95, 145 (1980).
20. A. W. THORLEY, Materials Behaviour and Physical Chemistry in Liquid Metal Systems (ed. H. U.
    BORGSTEDT), p. 19. Plenum Press, Karlsruhe (1981).
21. N. P. BHAT and H. U. BORGSTEDT, J. Nuclear Mater. 158,7 (1988).
22. A. W. THORLEY, A. BLUNDELL and J. A. BARDSLEY, Materials Behaviour and Physical Chemistry in
    Liquid Metal Systems (ed. H. U. BORGSTEDT), p. 5. Plenum Press, Karlsruhe (1981).
23. R. C. NEWMAN, T. M. FOONG and K. SIERADZKI, Carras. Sci. 28, 523 (1988).
24. G. E. RHEAD, Appl. Surf. Sci. 47,35 (1991).
25. S. P. LYNCH, Advances in the Mechanics and Physics of Surfaces (eds R. M. LATANISION and T. E.
    FISCHER), Vol. 2, p. 265. Harwood Academic Publishers (1983).
26. J. R. GALVELE, Carras. Sci. 27, 1 (1987).
27. W. M. ROBERTSON, Trans. Metals Soc. AIME 236,1478 (1966).
28. T. LIVNE, X. CHEN and W. W. GERBERICH, Scripta Metall. 20, 659 (1986).
29. J. E. CORDWELL, BNES Conf. on Liquid Alkali Metals, p. 177. Nottingham (1973).
